The Relevance of Reasoning and Alignment

Incoherence in Ontology Matching

Christian Meilicke

KR& KM Research Group, University of Mannheim, Germany

christian@informatik.uni-mannheim.de

Abstract. Ontology matching has become an important field of research over the last years. Although many different approaches have been
proposed, only few of them are committed to a well defined semantics.
As a consequence, the possibilities of reasoning are not exploited to their
full extent. A reasoning based approach will not only improve ontology matching, but will also be necessary to solve certain problems that
hinder the progress of the whole field. We focus on the notion of alignment incoherence to understand the capabilities of reasoning in ontology
matching.

1 Problem Statement

Ontology matching has been identified as key element towards realizing the
vision of the semantic web by bridging the gap between different conceptualizations of similar or overlapping domains. The core problem is the detection of
semantic relations between concepts, properties or instances of two ontologies.
In addition, many important side issues have been tackled, e.g. collaborative
ontology matching, matcher selection, versioning of alignments, etc. Neverthe-
less, the role of semantics and in particular the role of reasoning in the context
of ontology matching has been neglected or dealt with in an imprecise man-
ner. This can be explained by the fact that many ontologies typically used as
testcases within the matcher community are hierarchies that do not contain expressive constructs such as disjointness or property restrictions. Some of these
ontologies, for example, are not modeled by knowledge engineers but based on
automatically converting poorly structured knowledge bases into OWL.1 Thus,
any reasoning based approach will not exploit its full potential on most accepted
testcases. Another explanation can be found in the history of ontology matching which can be seen as a further development of matching database or XML
schemas. Ontologies are in most cases interpreted within a DL based semantics,
where we find clear definitions of notions like e.g. entailment, satisfiability and
inconsistency. Contrary to this, a comparable model based semantics is often not

1 In the Ontology Alignment Initiative [1], for example, we find a large deal of ontologies that are automatically generated OWL representations of Thesauri or Web
directories or have been converted from formalisms like OBO.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 934938, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009
?

?

?
given in the context of database semantics or cannot be applied directly to the
field of ontology matching.

In our work we are concerned with the role of semantics in the context of
ontology matching. In particular, we focus on the problem of alignment incoherence and show that a reasoning based approach can be applied in different
contexts to enrich and optimize ontology matching.

2 Related Work and Motivation

Due to the lack of space, an exhaustive overview on related work cannot be
given. Instead, we focus on specific problems to clarify the need for a reasoning
based approach.

Evaluation. The classical measures used to evaluate ontology matching results
are precision and recall. They are based on comparing an alignment A against
a reference alignment R on a syntactic level. Suppose, that there exists a correspondence c in A not included in R but derivable from R. On a pure syntactic
level c has to be counted as incorrect correspondence, which is obviously an unreasonable choice. In many accepted testcases the classical syntactic approach
has no negative effects, since A and R are restricted to equivalences where the
deductive closure coincides with the deductive reduction. The problem has been
dealt with in [2] under the notion of semantic precision an recall. Although, the
problem has been precisely described, there are still some issues that have to
be solved, e.g. the fact that the deductive closure of an alignment is an infinite
set. Computing semantic precision and recall will become even more important,
when complex correspondences come to the fore.

Semantics. Lots of research is concerned with theoretical issues related to alignment semantics. In [3], for example, the authors formally investigate different
alignment formalisms. Nevertheless, both lines of research - the theory of alignment semantics vs. the practically oriented task of ontology matching - are only
loosely coupled. Most matching systems are not committed to a certain seman-
tics. Neither do they ensure the coherence of generated alignments nor do they
allow to generate the deductive closure with respect to a certain semantics. We
find a counterpart in the procedure of the Ontology Alignment Initiative (OAEI)
[1], where in none of the subtasks results are expected to agree on a certain se-
mantics.

Incoherence. We already claimed that no matching system ensures the coherence of its results. One might raise the objection that system like e.g. ASMOV
and Lily make both use of a debugging component (see section 10 in [1]), which
is also referred to as semantic verification. To the best of our knowledge, these
debugging mechanisms are pattern based, which means that the final alignment
is checked for certain patterns that indicate erroneous combinations of corre-
spondences. Non of these patterns is explicitly backed by a certain semantics

C. Meilicke

and their motivation, although comprehensible, is only an ad hoc explanation.
Notions like completeness and soundness are not applicable with respect to these
patterns.2

3 Approach and Methodology

Euzenat and Shvaiko have listed the problem of reasoning with alignments as one
of the ten outstanding challenges in ontology matching [5]. The previous section
indicates that there exists no unique approach to cope with this challenge. We
propose an approach centered around the notion of alignment incoherence. In
particular, we are concerned with the following research questions.

(1) How can the incoherence of an alignment be measured and interpreted?
(2) How can reasoning about incoherence be applied to improve the results of a

matcher?

(3) Can incoherence be used to support manual alignment revision?

First of all, our approach requires to define the notion of alignment incoher-
ence. Given a semantics S and an alignment A, we defined A as incoherent with
respect to S, whenever there exists a satisfiable class in one of the aligned ontologies that becomes unsatisfiable due to interpreting A in terms of S. This
definition abstracts from the specifics of S and is applicable for any semantics S
that supports the notion of satisfiability. An answer to the first question requires
to elaborate a theory of alignment incoherence and to apply the resulting measures in the evaluation process. For answering the second question we have to
compare an alignment generated by a matching system against a subset of this
alignment where all incoherences have been resolved automatically. The third
issue requires to take at least two aspects into account. On the one hand we
have to compare the resulting alignment against the results of an unsupported
revision. On the other hand we have to analyze in how far the effort for the
human in the loop can be decreased.

4 Results

The origin of our work, starting two years ago, can be found in a paper that
describes how Distributed Description Logics (DDL) can be used to reason about
ontology alignments [6]. Based on the proposed framework, we used DDL as
alignment semantics in our first experiments. In [7] we focused on automatically
repairing alignments generated by different state of the art matching systems.
In particular, we applied a greedy approach to resolve alignment incoherences
by removing the correspondence with lowest confidence from minimal sets of

2 S-Match [4], on the contrary, employs sound and complete reasoning procedures.
Nevertheless, the underlying semantic is restricted to propositional logic due to the
fact that ontologies are interpreted as tree-like structures.
?

?

?
conflicting correspondences. This approach increased the precision of the results
between 2% and 19% depending on the particular matching system. In [8] we
used a similar approach but imposed this choice on the user. In particular, we
observed that the effort of a reasoning supported revision is in average reduced
to 40% compared to a complete manual revision.3

Since DDL is mainly motivated by its possibilities to reason in a distributed
environment, we proposed another semantic motivated by the use case of merging ontologies. This semantics can be seen as the natural translation of correspondences into DL-axioms. We first defined this semantics in a study where
we applied the approach to synthetic ontologies, experimenting with a decision
procedure that aims to remove a minimum number of correspondences weighted
via their confidences [10] instead of the greedy approach explained above. A
comparison of several methods for choosing a coherent subset of an alignment
and their application can be found in [11], where we observed minor improvements often based on a trade off between precision and recall. Our experiments
indicate that a heuristic that aims to achieve a global optimum will result in
better choices whenever we have alignments with a high number of conflicts.

Recently, we focused on the first research question and proposed four ways
to measure the degree of incoherence of an alignment [12]. Even though our
definitions are based on merging ontologies, they are directly applicable to any
other alignment semantics that supports the notion of satisfiability. We first
applied this approach to the submissions of the OAEI 2008 conference track,
where we observed that in average about 15% of the correspondences in an
alignment have to be removed for logical reasons.4 In particular, it turned out
that even systems with debugging components could not ensure the coherence
of their alignments. Moreover, we proved that a certain way to measure the
incoherence of an alignment A results in a strict upper bound for the precision
of A which was an unexpected and important result of our research.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

We motivated our work by general consideration about the role of reasoning
in ontology matching. While there are many open problems, we focused on a
specific family of interrelated problem centered around the notion of alignment
incoherence. In particular, we implemented a reasoning system that allows to
reason about alignments to repair incoherent alignments and to measure the
degree of incoherence. The implemented techniques, partially derived from the
field of ontology debugging, require a full fledged reasoning approach that will
become problematic for large ontologies. In future work we have to tackle this
problem by optimizing our reasoning strategies. In addition, we extended our
system to support subsumption correspondences and correspondences between

3 A summary of both approaches and their results can be found in [9].
4 Notice that this result clearly shows that the capabilities of reasoning in ontology
matching are not yet exploited to their full extent. Detailed results are reported
in [1].

C. Meilicke

properties. First results show that the property extension significantly increases
the number of detectable coherence conflicts. Nevertheless, further experiments
have to confirm our first exploratory studies.

We started our work with automatically debugging ontology alignments. It
turned out that we increased the quality of an alignment in most cases. Never-
theless, we often observed a trade off between precision and recall. We assume
that this is based on the fact that we worked on the final alignment generated by
a matcher, e.g. extracted from a similarity matrix. The benefits of our reasoning
component can be further increased if correspondences eliminated by the extraction method of the matching system, would also be available for the decision
process of our component. To check this hypotheses we are currently implementing our own matching system where the input to the reasoning component is not
restricted to a previously filtered set of correspondences.
