Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 1 (2003) 15

Editorial

A new journal for a new era of the World Wide Web

We are delighted to welcome you to the first issue
of the Journal of Web Semantics. With your help we
aim to make this journal the premier publication for a
new era of computing: one in which machine-readable
semantics enable an intelligently capable Web. The
Semantic Web is the most well known version of
this new vision, and, despite its relative youth, has already promoted a flurry of action. From exciting new
research to the deployment of industrial standards;
from academic experimental prototypes to commercial endeavours: we are at the centre of a maelstrom of
activity. The languages needed to define the Semantic
Web; the architectural components and tools needed
to build and maintain it; the content necessary to use
it; and the applications that will exploit it  all these
activities are happening at once and yet are interdepen-
dent. This makes the Semantic Web an exciting place.

First, a few questions:

 What are Web Semantics, what technologies do
we need to deliver semantics to the Web and how
might they be used by Web-based applications?
 Given the wide range and relative maturity of activities in the community, how will this journal
provide the breadth and depth needed, and how
will it itself become part of the Semantic Web?
 How does this first issue reflect the ambitions of
the Semantic Web and set the tone for the Journal
of Web Semantics?

Now, a few answers.

1. Science, services and agents on the
World Wide Web

The urge to find, collect, store and share information
has always been with mankind. The Web has made

this easier than ever. It has revolutionized the way we
seek information. It has brought democracy to publi-
cation. It has speeded up the dissemination of facts,
as well as fictions, to a global community. It offers a
ubiquitous interface to databases and document management systems and a universal connective fabric for
intranets as well as the Internet.

The good news is that if you need a piece of information it is sure to be available to you somewhere.
The problem is how to find it and how to integrate
different pieces in a meaningful way. Document management systems and search engines do not provide
answersthey offer more or less relevant documents
to be interpreted by the human reader. A query to a
database only provides exact answers and cannot suggest results beyond its current content.

To search for and link information, a person or
some specific application must interpret the content
of these information resources. To make the contents
of documents and the links between them generally machine-interpretable, to make the contents of
databases interpretable on a conceptual level, we must
associate with web resources metadata that conveys
their semanticshence the Semantic Web [1]. The
Semantic Web does not replace the Web; it offers an
integrating descriptive fabric alongside the web for
search engines, information brokers and ultimately
intelligent agents.

No one technology holds the monopoly of Web

Semantics. For example:
 Underpinning metadata with precise and shared semantics requires ontologies to provide a consensual,
shared conceptualization of a domain based on a
consensus building process (see [2] and Dill et al.
in this issue).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2003.09.002

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2003) 15

 Ontologies rely on formal knowledge representation
languages that integrate aspects of formal languages
with the requirements of the web. The Web Ontology Working Group of W3C, recently proposed
OWL as the ontology language for the Semantic
Web (see Horrocks et al. in this issue).
 Web Services bring a computational element for
accessing and executing software components and
applications. Developments such as DAML-S [3]
and The Web Service Modeling Framework [4] aim
at integrating Semantic Web methods with Web
Services,
to enable automatic service discovery,
configuration and execution (see Sycara et al. in this
issue).
 Agents benefit from the declarative framework;
agent-based systems will evolve into effective systems once more machine-interpretable content and
intelligent services are available on the web [5].
 Database view management, schema transforma-
tion, schema integration, and query processing
offer a plethora of experience in scaleable semantic
technologies (see Melnik et al. in this issue). Combined with the strengths in transactions aspects and
scalability, the database area will be an important
contributor to the further development of Semantic
Web applications [6].

The web is not

the only distributed computing
infrastructure that can benefit from semantics. We
are beginning to see the integration of semantic aspects into Peer-to-Peer Systems and the Grid. Peer
selection or message routing can be optimized by
having more semantic information available about the
services a peer offers or the information a peer is storing (see Aberer et al. in this issue). The merging of
Grid capabilities with Web Services (the Open Grid
Service Architecture) and developments in Semantic
Grids enable the dynamic formulation of Virtual
Organizations of Grid resources and the integration of data from different sources in a semantically
consistent way [7,8].

Many application areas and industry sectors already benefit, or will come to do so, from the new
semantic infrastructure that evolves. e-Commerce,
or Enterprise Application Integration, gain a new
level of flexibility for running business-to-business
applications or networked enterprises. e-Science, exploiting semantic grid technologies, will allow new

ways of cooperation among scientists and thus enable
a new level of synergy between researchers working
in different institutions and locations [9]. New generation knowledge management solutions in which
knowledge management is an effortless part of day
to day activities, and where appropriate knowledge
is automatically delivered to the right people at the
right time at the right granularity via a range of user
devices, is another promising application area.

The web and web-based applications will reach a
new level of functionality only if web contents and
Web Services are characterized in a way that delivers
as much semantics as is needed to meet the application
needs.

2. Structure and contents of the journal

No one discipline holds the monopoly of Web Se-
mantics. Distributed computing, data and knowledge
management, artificial intelligence, digital libraries,
language design and implementation, architecture,
natural language processingall play their role. It
is the confluence of these technologies that is the
key, and so it is the key for the Journal of Web Se-
mantics. We plan to bring together the best research
from all disciplines aimed at capturing and exploiting
semantics in distributed information management.

The research is driven by applications and exposed
through demonstrators; experimental prototypes are
running alongside commercial developments; fundamental research is working in consort with standards
activities in W3C and other bodies. The journal will
reflect all these streams of activity and their interaction
to give a window on the whole of the state of the art.
We aim to cover a dynamic and vibrant new area,
and target an audience that needs to know the latest
innovations while they are fresh. We plan to achieve
this without sacrificing quality by providing a mix
of traditional research papers as well as high-quality
letters and short articles that present important results
with the shortest possible publication delays.

Thus, the range of papers will reflect the diversity

of activity, and maturity:

Papers, Short or Long: These are traditional research papers describing novel research, large-scale
experiments, or exciting systems of relevance to the
journals readership. We have no specific paper limit;

we particularly encourage short papers on less mature
but exciting innovations.

Letters: Letters are one to two page notifications (of
the kind found in Scientific publications like Science)
focusing on a specific result or important innovation,
theoretical or practical. Letters will be an important
way for exciting results to get into refereed publication
in the shortest possible time.

Demonstrations: Demonstration papers are short
papers describing a freely available demonstration,
accompanied by a pointer to a site where the demonstration runs, or from which it can be downloaded.
Reviewers will check the quality of the demonstra-
tion, and that the paper presents enough information
to understand what it does and that it actually works.
Our web site gives details of licensing arrangements.
Ontologies: Ontology papers are expected to
describe the development of a publicly available on-
tology, what is in it, and why it is important. The
ontology should be published in a standard language
or that the details of its representation should be published and available to our readers. We will review
the quality of the write-up, and the modeling quality
of the ontology itself.

You can help us make this journal relevant to your
needs. If you have something you think belongs in
the journal, but it does not easily fit into one of these
categories, contact one of the Editors-in-Chief.

3. Practicing what we preach

We expect this journal to have a strong web presence
where we practice what we preach. Thus we plan to
use web technologies in a number of different ways:
Rapid publication mixing e-journal and print journal models. Final submissions will be posted on our
web site immediately after acceptance. After typesetting they will appear in traditional print form, and on
Elseviers web site and in their electronic archivesa
major resource available in thousands of libraries
around the world.

Metadata mark-up using Dublin Core will be created for you, and you will have the opportunity to
add any other metadata you wish using tools developed by the community. Our paper repository will be
displayable not just as text, but also as bibtex entries
(and other formats as they become standard). We aim

to make the journal site a sand-box for the commu-
nity.

Searching and filtering papers, using Semantic Web
technologies, for generating custom pages containing
the papers by a particular author or on a particular
topic.

Demonstrations and ontologies published in the
journal will be made available linking back the
authors site and archiving a copy of the submission.
Hence the most up to date version is visible, but the
version at submission time is available.

Our goal is to make this one of the most readable
journals on your shelves and a repository of important
resources on the web.

4. This issue

Our first issue purposely attempts to reflect the diversity and range of research shaping Web Semantics,
with representatives of most of our paper styles: five
long research papers, each viewing the web in a different way, and two short papers describing an ontology
and a demonstrator application.

Knowledge representation is a major topic of Web
Semantics. The challenge is to view the web as a huge
knowledge base. In From SHIQ and RDF to OWL:
The Making of a Web Ontology Language Horrocks
et al. introduce the OWL Web Ontology Language,
a formal language for representing ontologies in the
Semantic Web, recently announced by W3C as a
candidate recommendation. OWL offers the features
culled from the results of knowledge representation
research, and was designed on top of RDF. The paper
describes how OWL was born, what research issues
have been solved, and what remains.

Agent technology facilitates the use of Web Seman-
tics, and Web Services are facilitated by the use of
Web Semantics. The challenge is to view the web as a
huge service-based multi-agent system. Sycara et al.
in Automated Discovery, Interaction and Composition of Semantic Web Services propose DAML-S for
describing Semantic Web Services, which combines
the web services architecture with Semantic Web.
DAML-S provides an abstract description of Web
Services, and can support matching and interaction
among web services. The paper describes the implementation of the DAML-S/UDDI Matchmaker and

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2003) 15

the DAML-S Virtual Machine to actually prototype
Semantic Web Services.

Database technology is another stream of Web
Semantics. Sergey Melnik et al. develop a generic
model management system called Rondo in Developing Metadata-Intensive applications with Rondo.
The challenge is to view the web as the integration
of a huge number of online applications, services,
and databases. These systems are tied together using
mediators, mappings, database views, and transformation scripts. Model management reduces the amount
of programming needed for integrating applications.
The paper introduces high-level operators to manipulate models and mappings between models, such as
change propagation, view reuse, and reintegration.

Semantic annotation is the key to create the semantic content of the Semantic Web. A case for automated
large-scale semantic annotation by Dill et al. rises to
the challenge to automatically create a huge volume
of tagged web contents from existing web pages. The
paper describes Seeker, a platform for large-scale text
analysis, and SemTag, an application written on the
platform that performs the automated semantic tagging of large corpora. Approximately 264 million web
pages are tagged, generating around 434 million disambiguated semantic annotations.

Aberer et al.s Start making sense: The Chatty
Web approach for global semantic agreements describes a step towards self-learning networks of peers
establishing semantic operability automatically. The
challenge is to harness the huge network of interconnected data sources, and to come to negotiated
agreements on semantics. Participating data sources
incrementally develop global agreement in an evolutionary and completely decentralized process that
solely relies on pair-wise,
interactions. The
authors claim their approach applies to any system which provides a communication infrastructure
(websites or databases, decentralized systems, P2P
systems) and offers the opportunity to study semantic
interoperability as a global phenomenon in a network
of information sharing parties.

local

Ontology is a key to realizing semantic contents.
Golbeck et al. have developed an ontology based on
the National Cancer Institutes Thesaurus. The need
for a comprehensive terminology arose because terms
were often locally developed within various sections
of the Institute. To make the knowledge in the The-

saurus more useful and accessible, the National Cancer
Institute and the University of Maryland have worked
together to produce an OWL ontology from the The-
saurus.

Tools are needed to accelerate the advance of Web
Semantics. R. Guha and Rob McCool report on TAP,
an experimental system for identifying and researching different technical issues such as scalable query
languages, sharing vocabularies, bootstrapping knowledge bases, automated extraction of RDF from text,
etc. TAP has been used to create large-scale semantic
annotation as described by Dill and colleagues.

Future issues will include papers on Semantic Grid,
Natural Language Processing, Digital Library and
more to greatly advance Web Semantics.

We are at a key point in the Webs journey. This
journal plans to not only chart its path but hopefully
influence itthis is only possible if it serves you and
you contribute to it. We look forward to your papers
and your engagement as we strive to make the Journal
of Web Semantics the cypher for a new community.

We would like to thank all the authors and the paper
reviewers for their efforts in starting up this journal,
Elsevier for their support in the creation and running
of the journal, and Karon Mee and Simon Harper for
running the Editorial office.
