Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 1 (2003) 7580

The National Cancer Institutes Thesaurus and Ontology
Jennifer Golbeck a,

, Gilberto Fragoso b, Frank Hartel b, Jim Hendler a,
Jim Oberthaler b, Bijan Parsia a

a Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, A.V. Williams Building, College Park, MD 20742, USA

b National Cancer Institute, Center for Bioinformatics, USA

Received 8 May 2003; received in revised form 23 July 2003; accepted 31 July 2003

1. Introduction

The NCI Thesaurus is a public domain description
logic-based terminology produced by the National
Cancer Institute, and distributed as a component of
the NCI Center for Bioinformatics caCORE distribution [1]. It is deep and complex compared to most
broad clinical vocabularies,
implementing rich semantic interrelationships between the nodes of its tax-
onomies. The semantic relationships in the Thesaurus
are intended to facilitate translational research and
to support the bioinformatics infrastructure of the
Institute.

The NCI Thesaurus evolved from the NCI Metathe-
saurus. NCI Metathesaurus is based on the National
Library of Medicine Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus. The NCI Metathesaurus
has been operational since 1999. A public version is
available at http://ncimeta.nci.nih.gov.

The need for a comprehensive NCI-wide terminology arose because NCI staff requires access to


Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-301-405-2662;

fax: +1-301-405-6707.

E-mail addresses: golbeck@cs.umd.edu (J. Golbeck),

fragosog@mail.nih.gov (G. Fragoso), hartel@mail.nih.gov
(F. Hartel), hendler@cs.umd.edu (J. Hendler),
oberthaj@mail.nih.gov (J. Oberthaler), bparsia@isr.umd.edu
(B. Parsia).

timely and accurate information about activities related to the scientific mission of the Institute. The
collection, storage and retrieval of data related to NCI
research programs is necessary to analyze, manage,
and report about these activities. Though centralized
coding of NCI-supported research-related activities
met some of these needs, supplementary data coding had become common. This coding was assigned
independently within various components of the In-
stitute, and was frequently based on locally developed term lists or other informal vocabulary, making
it difficult to find and combine information across
programs.

The NCI

source vocabulary within the NCI
Metathesaurus encompasses the terminology used by
the various offices and divisions within the Institute,
with the goal of providing a common vocabulary to
increase the interoperability of information systems.
The NCI vocabulary provided not only an initial
Institute-wide integrated vocabulary, but also rich
mappings of NCI terminology to the numerous other
biomedical vocabularies.

Useful as it is, however, the NCI Metathesaurus is
not well suited to serve as a coding nomenclature.1
The hierarchies of the NCI terminology in NCI

1 We define a nomenclature as addressing the symbol to object

relation in the semiotic triangle.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2003.07.007

J. Golbeck et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2003) 7580

Metathesaurus are not
true IS A hierarchies, for
example. The NCI Thesaurus, which became operational in late 2001, is designed to address this
need. It is intended for NCI offices and divisions
to use the Thesaurus as a source of codes associated with terminology concepts to annotate data and
other information artifacts and facilitate information retrieval. The NCI Thesaurus is not yet a true
ontology,2 as it contains numerous primitive con-
cepts. It might be fairly described as a nomenclature
with ontologic features. It is strongly ontology-like
across several taxonomies, however, containing detailed semantic relationships among genes, diseases,
drugs and chemicals, anatomy, organisms, and pro-
teins. Among these categories, thousands of concepts
are defined. Each concepts definition contains descriptive information, such as synonyms and English
definitions, and explanations of how it relates to other
concepts.

The Thesaurus has been expanded to support
bioinformatics-related research efforts, and in this
role, it is a source of information on asserted relationships between entities. With reference to a concept
representing an animal model of a human disease, for
example, the Thesaurus might describe relationships
such as genetic abnormality is associated with the disease and the organisms in which it occurs. Although
editors have defined a number of named ontologic
relations to support the descriptionlogic-based structure of the Thesaurus, additional relationships are considered for inclusion as required to support-dependent
applications.

The detailed information provided about such a
broad range of medical terms and topics is a rich and
useful data source for the medical community. In an
effort to make the knowledge in the Thesaurus more
useful and accessible to the public, the National Cancer Institute and the University of Maryland, College
Park have worked together to produce an OWL [2] ontology from the Thesaurus. In the following sections,
this paper will describe the terminology development
process at NCI, and the issues associated with converting a descriptionlogic-based nomenclature to a
semantically rich OWL ontology.

2 We define an ontology as addressing the symbol to concept

relation in the semiotic triangle.

2. Ontology development

Given the rapid pace of research findings and
clinical refinement related to cancer prevention and
treatment, the content of the NCI Thesaurus evolves
rapidly. To keep the information as up to date as
possible, a new release is made every month. With
nearly a dozen full
time subject matter experts
working on different parts of the terminology, a
well-structured and complex process is used to ensure
accuracy and coherence. NCI uses the Apelon Inc.s
Terminology Development Environment and Workflow Manager software tools [3] in the development
process.

There are eight main steps in terminology develop-
ment. The full process is diagrammed in Fig. 1, and
the steps described below reference the numbered arcs
in the figure. At the beginning of each cycle, the Lead
Modeler, working from a local database with the current version of the Thesaurus creates a series of worklists which detail the concepts that need to be edited by
each modeler (1). The worklists are exported through
the Apelon Workflow Manager and assignments are
made to each Modeler or Expert Modeler (2).

Each modeler has a local copy of

the NCI
Thesaurus. This prevents problems where one modeler may make a change that impacts changes made
by another. Once each modeler makes changes to
their local copies of the nomenclature (3), a Change
Set that captures the editing performed in their local
copy is sent back to the Workflow Manager (4). The
changes are analyzed to identify any conflicts that
may have arisen in the process. If any corrections
are needed, new assignments are made for the expert
modelers, and the cycle repeats until no conflicts are
found (5). On a weekly basis, new baselines containing the consolidated changes are released to the
modelers to update their local databases (6).

To make a full export of the new nomenclature
available to the public on the web, several steps are
still required. All of the changes are imported into
a trial database and classified using description logic
rules. If there are any unexpected results, problematic
changes are either eliminated or corrected. Once classification is successful, comparisons and reviews are
made between the new classified nomenclature and
the previous version. In addition, the release candidate is also made available to developers of depen-

Workflow
Manager' s
Database

Modeler' s
Database

Workflow
Manager

Modele r

Workflow
Manager

External
Validation

Publication

Fig. 1. Workflow diagram of the NCI Th esaurus editing and publication cycle. This is an abbreviated version of the editing workflow
process. The numbers in the figure correspond to the numbers in the text above that describes the process.

dent projects for regression testing (7). When the final version is approved, it is published on the web (8)
at http://nciterms.nci.nih.gov. As part of the caCORE
distribution, it is periodically also made available in
both a flat file and XML formats. The flat file, how-
ever, does not include all the elements of the nomen-
clature, such as role relations.3

The February 2003 release of NCI Thesaurus contained about 26,000 concepts and about 71,000 terms
divided among 24 taxonomies. The taxonomies cover
administrative, applied and basic science and clinical
terminology.

3 These files can be downloaded from ftp://ftp1.nci.nih.gov/pub/

cacore/EVS/.

3. Conversion to OWL

Converting the NCI Thesaurus to an ontology in
OWL Lite is a multi-step process. At the end of
the production cycle, the Thesaurus is exported in
Apelons Ontylog XML format. Though the semantics intended by the modelers were included in the
XML, and recoverable using the Apelon server, the
complex relationships are not apparent to any thirdparty software.

In creating an ontology that represented these se-
mantics, the first choice was to decide among OWLs
three sub-languages: OWL Lite, OWL DL, and OWL
Full [2]. Though OWL Full is the most expressive of
the three languages, the first two have several advan-
tages. OWL DL and its formal subset, OWL Lite, are

J. Golbeck et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2003) 7580

guaranteed to be both computationally complete and
decidable. The NCI Thesaurus is created using a DL
tool, so the restrictions of these two variants of the
language were a reasonable fit. Since the elements required to express the relationships in the Thesaurus
fell within the restrictions of OWL Lite, we chose to
encode in that sub-language.

One of the most important steps in transforming the
Thesaurus into an ontology is to represent the concepts and their connections in a machine processable
way. In our ontology, each concept is given a formal
designator and the relationships between them are
formalized in the base ontology language. This overcomes any ambiguity between natural language-based
descriptive text, and formal concept names. In the
NCI Thesaurus, names of entities are semantically
rich. Some are simple one-word names, while others are long complex descriptions, e.g. Anti-human
chorionic gonadotropin vaccine/Gemcitabine and
Transporter 1, ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family B
(MDR/TAP). To do this, the original concept names

were converted to proper RDF identifiers by removing
any spaces and substituting illegal characters with un-
derscores. Names that began with numbers were also
prefixed with underscores to make them legal names.
The names in their original forms are preserved as
rdfs:label.

The four major types of definitions made in the
Thesaurus are Kinds, Roles, Properties, and Concepts.
Kinds are the top-level super classes for all of the
concepts defined in the Thesaurus, and basically enumerate the different categories of concepts. Kinds include such things as Anatomy, Biological Processes,
Chemicals and Drugs, and Diagnostic and Prognostic
Factors. Each Kind is converted to an owl:Class.

A Concept also translates to an owl:Class, as it describes a specific concept under one of the Kind cate-
gories. The bulk of the Thesaurus comprises concept
definitions, and this is also where the most complex
semantics occur. As such, it was the most difficult part
of the conversion. Consider the following abridged
concept definition from the Thesaurus XML:

<conceptDef>

<properties>

<name>Chlorambucil</name>
<code>C362</code>
<id>362</id>
<primitive/>
<kind>Chemicals and Drugs Kind</kind>

<definingConcepts>
<concept>
Nitrogen Mustard Compound
</concept>
</definingConcepts>

<definingRoles>

<role>
<some/>
<name>

Chemical or Drug FDA Approved for Disease

</name>
<value>

Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

</value>
</role>
</definingRoles>

<property>
<name>FULL SYN</name>
<value>
<![CDATA[
<term-name>
phenylbutyric acid nitrogen
mustard
</term-name>
<term-group>SY</term-group>
<term-source>NCI</term-source>]]>
</value>
</property>

<property>
<name>Semantic Type</name>
<value>
Pharmacologic Substance</value>
</property>

</properties>
</conceptDef>

As shown above, each Concept in the Thesaurus has
three main types of associated data: defining concepts,
defining roles, and properties. A defining concept is
essentially a super class, so we used rdfs:subClassOf
relationships here.

Roles translate to rdf:Properties in OWL. Roles describe how concepts relate to one. Generally, Roles
have domains and ranges of Kinds, and the values
are further limited to specific Concepts within concept
definitions. The Defining roles within a concept definition provide these local restrictions on the ranges of
roles. For example, the class Chlorambucil, a drug,
has the defining role:

in the ThesaurusConcepts, Kinds, Properties, and
Roleshas an associated code and id. These are
used as unique identifiers in the Apelon development
software, and, as such, are not defined explicitly
as Roles or Properties. This required a hard-coded
definition of both entities. They were defined as
owl:AnnotationProperties, just like other Properties in
the Thesaurus, and this allowed them to be attached
to all of the definitions in the ontology.

The example code above shows two Properties in
addition to code and id. Each Property is defined
to have a name and a value. The names of the properties correspond to actual property definitions included

<Chemical or Drug FDA Approved for Disease>

Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

</Chemical or Drug FDA Approved for Disease>

There is a class Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
defined in the ontology, as well as the role property
Chemical or Drug FDA Approved for Disease. In
the OWL output, there is a local restriction on the
range of that role to have owl:someValuesFrom the
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia class.

elsewhere in the files. Values needed to be attached, via
the Properties, to the new class. Since the Properties
are owl:AnnotationProperties, this is done in the same
way a property would be associated with an instance.
The final OWL ontology is made up of approximately 450,000 triples in a file that is over 33 MB.

<owl:Restriction>

<owl:onProperty rdf:resource=#rChemical or Drug FDA Approved for Disease/>
<owl:someValuesFrom rdf:resource=#Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia/>

</owl:Restriction>

Properties in the Thesaurus, on the other hand,
contain metadata that describes the class, but not
its instantiations or subclasses. Properties are defined as owl:AnnotationProperties in the ontology.
An owl:AnnotationProperty is a subclass of an
rdf:Property, and, like rdfs:comment and rdfs:label,4
can be attached to any class, property or instance.
This allows Properties from the Thesaurus to be associated directly to a Concepts corresponding class,
without violating the rules of OWL Lite.

In addition to explicitly named Properties, code
and id attributes are special cases. Every entity

4 rdfs:comment and rdfs:label are actually two pre-defined annotation properties in OWL. There are three others:owl:versionInfo,
rdfs:seeAlso, and rdfs:isDefinedBy. More details are available in
the OWL Reference at http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/.

A description and current OWL version is available for download at http://www.mindswap.org/2003/
CancerOntology. Currently, we are exploring the
inclusion of the OWL properties for controlling versions (including identification of deprecated classes
and properties). When this is completed, publication
of the Thesaurus to OWL will be incorporated into
the NCI monthly production cycle.

4. Lessons

Countless organizations have their own intricate and
well-developed thesauri that have been refined over
many years. With consummate converters, these thesauri can become a strong and useful element on the
semantic web. Like the Thesaurus from the National

J. Golbeck et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 1 (2003) 7580

Cancer Institute, many are available in an unusual form
of XML, or not in XML at all. As in this case, simple translations using standard XML parsers often will
not be a reasonable solution for making the transition
to RDF or OWL.

The most time consuming process in this conversion
was a making careful analysis of the Thesaurus to understand the best way to translate it into OWL. In the
terminology development process, Concepts are not
strictly considered to be instances or classes. However,
because of the hierarchical structure within the collection of Concepts, as well as the Roles that serve as local restrictions, they clearly translated best to classes
in OWL.

Discovering the distinction between Roles (local
restrictions on properties), and Properties (annotations
to a specific class) was another important step. At
this point in the development, we were forced to
make a choice in which species of OWL to use. Developers attached properties that are not inherited to

concepts. If the translator directly attached Properties to classes, the ontology would be in OWL Full.
For computational benefits, we decided to work in
OWL Lite, and thus owl:AnnotationProperties were
used.

For other conversions, these same types of distinctions and decisions must be made. The expressive
power of a proprietary encoding can vary widely from
that in OWL or RDF. Understanding the original semantics and engineering a solution that most closely
duplicates it is critical for creating a useful and accurate ontology.
