Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 30 (2015) 12

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial

We are delighted to present this Special Issue of the Semantic
Web Journal on Semantic Search, a topic at the intersection of
information retrieval and natural language semantics.

Information Retrieval is the field concerned with obtaining
user-requested information from stored data. With the rise of
the Web, this has mostly meant retrieving Web documents that
match a keyword query. However, recent years have seen the
development of knowledge baseslarge computer-processable
collections of knowledge about the world. These knowledge
bases (KBs) store information about people, cities, movies, or
organizations. Hundreds of such KBs are available online in what
is known as the Semantic Web. Several of them are linked together
in the Web of Linked Data (the LOD cloud). This knowledge can
now be used to enhance the search for information: documents
can be annotated with data from the KBs, queries can be answered
directly on the KB, or supplementary information can be pulled
in from the Semantic Web. The advent of collaboratively-created
knowledge resources, like Wikipedia, Wiktionary, Freebase, etc.,
has even increased the amount and kind of knowledge that
can be linked, especially thanks to automated structuring and
extraction methods. Google has deployed its Knowledge Cards,
small sheets of structured information that accompany the search
result whenever the search term has been recognized as a
known entity. Microsofts Bing search engine, likewise, presents
structured results from its Satori knowledge base. We may thus
be witnessing a paradigm change in search, where semantic
information enhances, accompanies, and guides search results.

The feedback received from the research community for this
special issue was very positive, with 43 submissions received
overall. The papers underwent a rigorous selection process, which
was possible thanks to the involvement of more than 60 expert
reviewers. Thanks to this, we could select 6 outstanding papers,
and provide an appealing and up-to-date overview of different
aspects and lines of research pursued on the topic of semantic
search. Current research questions include: How can we build
and maintain the knowledge bases that power semantic search?
How can we bridge the gap between natural language questions
and structured knowledge? How can we determine the user
intent in search queries? How can we combine textual and
semantic information in search results? How can we make use
of the Semantic Web for semantic search? And finally: How can
we evaluate our efforts in semantic search in a standardized
framework?

We present 6 papers that provide the latest academic responses
to these questions. Our first paper,
Global Machine Learning
for Spatial Ontology Population by Parisa Kordjamshidi and
Marie-Francine Moens deals with the construction of a knowledge

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.01.004
1570-8268/
 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V.

language text. The work focuses on the
base from natural
spatial domain. This includes the design of a suitable knowledge
representation, the design of an ontology, and techniques to
fill the ontology with facts extracted from corpora. Thereby,
this work shows how to bridge the gap between natural
language descriptions of spatial relationships and their computerprocessable representation.

Our second paper, Discovering and Understanding Word Level
User Intent in Web Search Queries by Rishiraj Saha Roy et al.,
addresses the problem of guessing the user intent from a query.
The work finds that user queries may contain content words
(which ask for a certain topic), and intent words (which specify
the type of the requested information). For example, a user looking
for Elvis Presley videos is not interested in the word videos
itself, but in retrieving motion pictures. Thus, videos is an intent
word. The paper defines the concept of intent words in this spirit,
and develops methods to determine such words in queries in 5
different languages.

The third approach to semantic search is Semantic Annotation,
Semantic Search, Language Models by Victoria Nebot et al.
Similar in spirit to Mimir, this paper presents a method for the
semantic annotation of the search corpus. The main idea is to

After these works have laid the ground, we venture into
semantic search itself. We present 3 approaches that enable users
to search with semantic enhancements. The first paper is SINA:
Semantic Interpretation of User Queries for Question Answering on
Interlinked Data by Saeedeh Shekarpour et al. It proposes to open
the wealth of information on the Semantic Web to users through
natural language queries. For this purpose, the paper develops a
method to translate user queries into SPARQL, the standard query
language of the Semantic Web. The paper also shows how the
queries can be executed on distributed semantic data. Thereby, the
proposed system combines the ease of natural language queries
with the preciseness and depth of structured results.

The next paper is Mimir: an Open-Source Semantic Search
Framework for Interactive Information Seeking and Discovery
by Bontcheva Kalina et al. It presents Mimiran open-source
framework for integrated semantic search over text, document
structure, linguistic annotations, and formal semantic knowledge.
The user can issue both complex structural queries, as well
as basic keyword queries to Mimir. The system offers an
interface, where users can save, refine,
interactive retrieval
and analyse the results of a semantic search over time.
In
addition, Mimir supports exploratory search through visualisation
interfaces. Mimir therefore lays the ground for a framework that
combines traditional keyword based search with deeper semantic
annotations.

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 30 (2015) 12

represent both KB concepts and corpus documents using statistical
language models. This allows a hybrid search on these data sources.
Experiments show that the proposed method is more effective and
efficient than state-of-the-art methods that rely on either contextfree annotation or keyword-based search alone.

The special issue concludes with An Overview of Semantic
Search Evaluation Initiatives by Khadija M. Elbedweihy et al. It
deals with the problem of how semantic search approaches can be
evaluated in a systematic and standardized way. While there are
established evaluation series in information retrieval and ontology
matching, such a framework is still missing in the area of semantic
search. This paper analyses existing semantic search evaluations,
discusses their limitations, and points to missing aspects in each
of them. It calls for a comprehensive evaluation framework that
tackles these limitations and fills the identified gaps. This forward
looking paper concludes our special issue.

This collection of papers shows us that semantic search has
overcome some challenges (such as a first semantic interpretation

of user queries) and is facing new ones (such as support for a
standardized evaluation), laying the ground for more sophisticated
approaches and paradigms that will surely make the search
experience more human-like and, consequently, more exciting and
appealing for the user.

We hope you will enjoy reading the papers contained in this
Special Issue! Finally, we would like to thank the team of reviewers
for their dedication to producing this special issue during the
whole review process. We would also like to thank Steffen Staab
and Silke Werger for their support.

Roberto Navigli
Italy

Fabian M. Suchanek
France
