Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 63

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial

computation time, while keeping the performance. The presented
classification experiments study influence of different choices for
graph kernels in the proposed framework.

The third paper DeFacto  Temporal and Multilingual Deep
Fact Validation by Daniel Gerber, Diego Esteves, Jens Lehmann,
Lorenz Buhmann, Ricardo Usbeck, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo and
Rene Speck deals with fact validation in knowledge bases providing
sources to ensure traceability. The proposed algorithm finds relevant data sources on the web and provides the user with excerpts
of the web pages in several natural languages. It also provides
support for facts with temporal scope. The paper also presents
a generic evaluation framework for fact checking in knowledge
bases.

The next paper An Unsupervised Instance Matcher for Schemafree RDF Data by Mayank Kejriwal and Daniel P. Miranker
proposes an unsupervised system for instance matching between
entities in schema-free Resource Description Framework (RDF)
data. A three-step approach is proposed, where the system
first automatically generates its own heuristic training set. The
generated training data is expected to contain some incorrectly
labeled samples, thus the rest of the approach is designed to handle
noise in the data.

The special issue concludes with Automatic Acquisition of
Class Disjointness by Johanna Volker, Daniel Fleischhacker and
Heiner Stuckenschmidt that discusses different approaches learning class disjointness axioms for ontologies. Two fundamentally
different state-of-the-art approaches are compared through analysis of their results. Based on that comparison the authors suggest
transfer learning for adding class disjointness to ontologies.

This collection of papers shows a variety of research problems
that can be successfully addressed by learning methods for
semantic web. We hope you will enjoy reading the papers
contained in this Special Issue! Finally, we would like to thank the
team of reviewers for their dedication to producing this special
issue during the whole review process. We would also like to thank
Tim Finin and Steffen Staab for their support.

Dunja Mladenic
Estevam R. Hruschka
Marko Grobelnik

We are delighted to present this Special Issue of the Semantic
Web Journal on Machine Learning and Data Mining for the
Semantic Web.

In the last years, Machine Learning, as well as Data Mining approaches have become the main focus of many research works and
initiatives related to the Semantic Web and the Web of Data. Challenges imposed by the large scale of Web Data, the uncertainty
related to contradictory and incomplete information, and also, by
properties and characteristics of Linked Data represent an interesting domain for emerging Machine Learning and Data Mining ap-
proaches.

The research community has provided very positive feedback,
we have received 22 submissions. The papers went through rigorous procedure of selection involving a number of expert reviewers.
Thanks to this, we were able to select five outstanding papers and
provide an interesting and up-to-date overview of research at the
intersection of machine learning, data mining and semantic web.
This special issue presents five papers that address research
involving machine learning and data mining methods in the
context of the Semantic web. Our first paper Using Semantic Data
to Improve Cross-Lingual Linking of Article Clusters by Evgenia
Belyaeva, Aljaz Kosmerlj, Andrej Muhic, Jan Rupnik and Flavio
Fuart presents a system that uses semantic data to improve crosslingual linking of news article clusters on a large scale. Canonical
correlation analysis is used to handle cross-linguality, using
Wikipedia as a data source for calculating cross-lingual similarity
and for cross-lingual semantic annotation. The paper proposes to
combine canonical correlation analysis with Entity vectors to take
into account semantic aspects of news. Experimental evaluation on
a news corpus shows improved performance when using semantic
information.

The second paper Substructure Counting Graph Kernels for
Machine Learning from RDF Data by Gerben Klaas Dirk de Vries
and Steven de Rooij introduces framework for learning from
Resource Description Framework (RDF) data using graph kernels
that count substructures in RDF graphs. The proposed techniques
are applicable on all kind of Linked Data, as almost no assumption
is made on the semantics of the data beyond being represented
in RDF. Special emphases is put on efficiency of the methods. The
paper proposes usage of fast kernel variants that are computed
directly on RDF graphs which was shown to substantially decrease

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.11.003
1570-8268/
