Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 5362

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Exposing INSPIRE on the Semantic Web
K. Patroumpas a,b,, N. Georgomanolis a, T. Stratiotis a, M. Alexakis a, S. Athanasiou a

a Institute for the Management of Information Systems, Athena Research Center, Hellas, Greece
b School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Hellas, Greece

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 30 January 2015
Received in revised form
25 September 2015
Accepted 28 September 2015
Available online 24 October 2015

Keywords:
INSPIRE
Geospatial data
Metadata

GeoSPARQL
Catalogue services

The INSPIRE Directive by the European Commission sets the legal and technical foundations towards
interoperable Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDIs) across Europe. EU member states are already providing
such services for several geospatial data themes (e.g., transportation networks, administrative units).
Unfortunately, the INSPIRE ecosystem has been largely disjoint from the Semantic Web, without any
means to repurpose existing SDIs as high-quality data sources, and thus multiply their value through
interlinking, reasoning and inferencing. In this paper, we introduce a methodology that can assist
stakeholders in exposing INSPIRE-aligned SDIs on the Semantic Web according to the recent GeoSPARQL
standard. We develop methods for discovering INSPIRE data through a virtual SPARQL endpoint over
existing INSPIRE catalogue services. Further, we implement a suite of tools for automatically transforming
INSPIRE data and metadata into RDF triples with geometries. The compiled geographic and thematic
information can then be loaded into semantic repositories for querying or interlinked with other data. Our
open-source solutions essentially repurpose existing INSPIRE SDIs, so as to promote uptake and facilitate
their reuse in practice. Finally, as a case study, we report our experience in validating this approach on a
real-world SDI with publicly available data for Greece in order to expose its contents through (Geo)SPARQL
endpoints.

 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Multiple products, systems, and organizations are dependent
on immediate access to accurate and official geospatial informa-
tion. This need is addressed mainly through Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDIs), i.e., a framework of technologies, policies, and institutional arrangements that together facilitate the creation, ex-
change, and use of geospatial data. Therefore, SDIs have a simple,
yet challenging goal: make geospatial data easier to discover and
use. SDIs are mature systems, developed after decades of research
& development, based on standards led by international bodies
(ISO/TC 211 [1], OGC [2], W3C [3]), and with de facto support across
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and web services.

In the European Union (EU), the INSPIRE Directive 2007/2/EC [4]
standardizes SDIs across member states, on a legislative, institu-
tional, and technical level. By 2020, this under way INfrastructure for SPatial InfoRmation in Europe will enable discovery, down-
load, and visualization of geospatial information in a common,

 Corresponding author at: Institute for the Management of Information Systems,

Athena Research Center, Hellas, Greece.

E-mail address: kpatro@dblab.ece.ntua.gr (K. Patroumpas).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.09.003
1570-8268/ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

cross-boundary manner. Several EU member states already offer INSPIRE-compliant metadata, data, and services, whereas their
harmonization and full compliance proceeds with specific mile-
stones. INSPIRE SDIs will gradually expose through standardized
services the wealth of official geospatial data produced, curated,
and applied by public sectors across the EU. Researchers and practitioners in the GIS community are provided with great opportunities to reuse this data, across diverse domains and applications.
The emerging alignment of INSPIRE data licensing policies towards
open knowledge further broadens the potential for value added
services. The volume, quality, and wealth of this body of geospatial knowledge can be a game-changer for industry, research, and
governance.

Unfortunately, the INSPIRE ecosystem has been largely disjoint
from the Semantic Web. INSPIRE is based on slowly changing and
widely established standards, adopted through careful consulta-
tion. INSPIRE SDIs should be considered as almost diachronic, extremely slowly evolving, but powerful resources for geospatial
knowledge. The fact that Semantic Web technologies are not integrated into INSPIRE SDIs is therefore simply a matter of unfortunate timing. The rise of the Semantic Web followed the period when the INSPIRE technical specifications were prepared,
discussed and finalized. Hence, establishing this missing link

K. Patroumpas et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 5362

We deem that our approach provides a technical roadmap towards bridging the gap between the INSPIRE and Linked Data
ecosystems. It relies on existing INSPIRE SDIs, requiring no modifications for the SDI, and no extra work on behalf of the SDI owner.
Even an external stakeholder could simply deploy our open-source
software and provide full GeoSPARQL access to INSPIRE data across
the EU.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the challenges in exposing INSPIRE as linked data
as well as some recent approaches. Translating INSPIRE metadata
into RDF is analysed in Section 3. In Section 4, we present a middleware for INSPIRE data discovery from catalogue services in the
Web. The transformation process and RDF modelling issues regarding INSPIRE data are examined in Section 5. In Section 6, we report
our experience in applying this methodology on a real-world SDI.
Finally, Section 7 offers conclusions and future research directions.

2. Background and related work

Fig. 1. Lifecycle of linked data [6].

between INSPIRE and the Semantic Web is an open and challenging
issue.

Still, little information has been published as linked geospatial
data and associated with other resources in the Semantic Web.
Apart from the inherent complexity of spatial concepts, the lack
of standardization makes this task quite challenging. However, the
recent OGC GeoSPARQL standard [5] proposes structures for storing RDF geometries, querying them through a SPARQL extension
equipped with a variety of spatial operations, as well as a foundation to support spatial reasoning. We regard this development as a
great opportunity to publish INSPIRE data encoded in and queried
through GeoSPARQL.

In this work, our goal is to devise effective methods for automatically exposing INSPIRE data and metadata as Linked Open Data
(LOD). We believe that it is possible to repurpose existing INSPIRE
SDIs in the Semantic Web, without affecting their established operation and at no additional costs. Apart from a testament to the
sound decision making process of INSPIRE stakeholders regarding
forwards-compatibility, this can offer to the Semantic Web community de facto access to high quality geospatial data.

To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first attempt to
build an abstraction layer on top of the INSPIRE infrastructure
based on GeoSPARQL concepts, thus making INSPIRE contents
accessible and discoverable as linked data. As we discuss below,
we had to address several issues not strictly related to geometries,
but ranging from property alignments to assignment of URIs and
multi-lingual support. As a solid proof-of-concept, we apply this
methodology on data and metadata from an SDI in Greece, and
we set up endpoints for querying and discovering such features.
What is more, we develop a platform that can act as a broker
between a SPARQL endpoint and existing Catalogue Services in the
Web (CSW), in order to enable on-the-fly discovery of third-party
INSPIRE metadata via Semantic Web technologies.

According to the Linked Data Lifecycle (Fig. 1), proposed by [7]
and extended by [8], the scope of our work lies within two specific
stages. With regard to Search/Browsing/Exploration, we offer a tool
(TripleGeo-CSW) that allows users to explore the quantity and
quality of INSPIRE-compliant datasets available from Catalogue
Services across Europe. Concerning Extraction, we provide the
TripleGeo tool, along with several scripts (XSL stylesheets, INSPIRE
RDF mappings) for translating INSPIRE-aligned features into RDF
representations. Consequently, our work is an integral, but selfsustained part of the lifecycle of geospatial linked data, enabling
the operation of the stages that follow, e.g., interlinking and
enrichment [9,10].

INSPIRE aims to set the framework for a pan-European SDI, so
as to facilitate sharing of environmental spatial information among
public authorities under a unified technical and institutional ba-
sis. These foundations include technical interoperability standards
for geospatial metadata, data and online services, as well as uniform legal rules for data sharing and reuse. According to the Directive [4], public authorities and organizations should provide their
spatial data according to INSPIRE specifications. These datasets relate to 34 themes [11] with a territorial dimension or environmental impact. They are organized into three stages according to Annexes to the Directive that specify the date of their release, with
full harmonization and publishing required by 2020. In this work,
we deal with the first group of data themes, as specified in Annex I:
(RS) Coordinate reference systems for uniquely referencing spatial

(GG) Geographical grid systems for data collection, analysis and

(GN) Geographical names of areas, regions,

localities,

towns,

(AU) Administrative units specified for local, regional and national

information.

reporting.

settlements, etc.

governance.

postal code.

land ownership.

infrastructures.

(AD) Addresses, usually specified by road name, house number, and

(CP) Cadastral parcels used for defining real property rights and

(TN) Transport networks, such as road, rail, air, and water network

(HY) Hydrography includes rivers, lakes, lagoons, marine areas, etc.
(PS) Protected sites, like national parks, fishing resources, cultural

heritage, etc.

At present, no complete INSPIRE ontology in RDF/OWL exists.
This reflects the difficulty of bridging the closed world assumption of UML models in INSPIRE with the open world view of RDF.
However, this limitation applies not only to INSPIRE, since exposing geospatial information as open linked data is a relatively new
research topic. In [12], a Reference Architecture for building inter-
operable, linked SDIs was presented based on analysing existing
SDIs. Especially for INSPIRE SDIs, some prominent opportunities
for utilizing linked open data have been highlighted by the Joint
Research Centre (JRC) of the European Commission in [13], along
with the requirements for achieving it.

With regard to exposing open linked metadata, a crosswalking approach has been proposed in [14]. This implies mappings
from popular geospatial metadata schemas to the Dublin Core
vocabulary [15], adding extra metadata elements and expressing
metadata terms in RDF. An alternative method was also suggested

in [16] for publishing geospatial metadata provisioned by custom
catalogue services as open linked metadata, directly from the UML
representation of the underlying custom schemas.

Exposing geospatial features as linked data is even more
challenging. For translating INSPIRE-compliant GML models into
semantic OWL ontologies, the approach in [17] takes into account
common characteristics of GML and RDF/OWL and INSPIRE UML
notations to produce the conversion rules for general and specifictype elements. There is also a method for translating SPARQL
queries to equivalent filtering requests according to the OGC Web
Feature Services (WFS) standard. This mapping can semantically
wrap standard INSPIRE download services and expose them as
SPARQL endpoints. In [18], a specific methodology was devised,
aiming at analysing heterogeneous data in Spain for four INSPIRE
themes (Administrative units, Hydrography, Statistical units, and
Meteorology), and then exposing them on the Web. This approach
entails generation of an ontology model by mixing different
existing ontologies and vocabularies, extraction of RDF data with
a variety of software tools, and finally interlinking. Most recently,
the approach in [19] focuses on deriving linked data from GML, and
also examines whether more meaningful RDF can be created from
GML by reusing existing concepts from vocabularies.

Most recently (April 2015), the Joint Research Centre (JRC) of the
European Commission has initiated a working group [20] that will
define an extension of the DCAT application profile for data portals
in Europe (DCAT-AP), which will describe geospatial datasets, data
series, and services. This extension (GeoDCAT-AP) will provide
an RDF syntax binding for the union of metadata elements of
the INSPIRE Metadata Regulation, the INSPIRE Regulation on
interoperability of spatial datasets and services, and the ISO19115 Core Elements [21]. GeoDCAT-AP will make spatial datasets,
data series, and services discoverable on general data portals, in
cross-border and cross-sector manner. We have taken part in the
discussions within this working group, which has led to a proposed
revision of the DCAT-AP that is currently (as of September 2015)
under public review.

In another recent development, W3C and OGC have jointly
started two working groups on standardization for Spatial Data on
the Web [22]. Their mission is to determine integration of spatial
information with other data on the Web; discovery by people and
machines of different facts about places at different levels of
granularity; and assessing existing methods and tools to create a
set of best practices.

In contrast to the aforementioned approaches, ours is the first
attempt to expose INSPIRE metadata and data according to the
GeoSPARQL specification, as we present next. Our suite of tools for
the Semantic Web not only can be used by data owners in order to
make their SDI contents accessible in RDF, but also for discovering
third-party data via SPARQL requests against catalogue services in
the Web.

3. Transforming INSPIRE metadata to RDF

The Data Catalogue Vocabulary (DCAT) [23] and the VoID Vocabulary (VoID) [24] are the two main (and often complementary)
approaches to cataloguing linked metadata, with the possible use
of other vocabularies, particularly from Dublin Core [15]. INSPIRE
metadata is extensively used to describe datasets, dataset series,
services and thematic layers across Europe. Still, the online INSPIRE
metadata editor [25] is not yet enriched with Semantic Web tech-
nologies. INSPIRE Implementing Rules [26] describe a schema for
INSPIRE-compliant metadata according to ISO-19115 [27] and ISO19119 [21]. The latter requires many more elements (e.g., points
of contact, restrictions), which have to be provisioned as well. Be-
sides, metadata published according to the ISO-19115 core is not

Table 1
Suggested RDF mappings for INSPIRE metadata [20].

INSPIRE metadata element
Resource title
Resource language
Keyword
Geographic bounding box
Responsible organization  owner

RDF mapping

dct:title
dct:language
dcat:keyword
dct:spatial
dct:rightsHolder

guaranteed to conform with the INSPIRE ontology, so an alignment
is necessary.

An exploratory investigation is under way by the Joint Research
Centre (JRC) of the European Commission towards using Semantic Web technologies for geospatial metadata [28], and a preliminary application profile has been defined [20]. A few representative of the suggested RDF mappings to vocabularies such as DCAT,
DCT, SKOS, vCard, etc., are shown in Table 1. Although not yet final-
ized, [20] has offered us a valuable basis to develop a methodology
for transforming INSPIRE metadata elements into RDF.

Our goal is to provide open-source tools that facilitate such
transformation in order to load the results into triple stores and
make them accessible through SPARQL. We are mostly interested
in exposing the spatial coverage of data, as well as the temporal
range of their lifecycle (i.e., when data was published or modified).
Many more elements are also important, such as descriptions
(e.g., title, abstract, subject, keywords), content assessments (such
as quality, provenance, or conformity), as well as their legal status
(owner, licence, point of contact, etc.).

In practice, we created an application profile for such metadata as a set of templates used in XSLT transformations. Regarding geographical coverage, a bounding box can be expressed either
as a GeoSPARQL polygon or a 2-dimensional rectangle (BOX2D),
depending on the target RDF store and its geospatial support.
Once invoked, our custom XSL stylesheet accepts an XML file with
INSPIRE-compliant metadata records, and translates them into
equivalent RDF statements according to the mapping. The resulting RDF/XML representation of INSPIRE-aligned metadata can then
be readily loaded into a triple store. The XSL stylesheet is generic,
covers all elements, and can be reused against any metadata conforming to INSPIRE specifications.

4. Discovering INSPIRE through Catalogue Services

OGC standard on Catalogue Services for the Web (CSW) [29]
describes application profiles for publishing, accessing, and
searching over collections of metadata on geospatial data, services,
and related resources. This metadata must be encoded in XML and
the response to users requests is returned in XML as well. CSWs
for INSPIRE-compliant metadata are already available in many
European countries.

Our work focuses on exposing such CSWs through a CSW-to-RDF
middleware, coined TripleGeo-CSW, which acts as a virtual SPARQL
endpoint for an arbitrary number of distributed SDIs. TripleGeoCSW accepts a SPARQL query from a user, then transforms and
forwards it to all available CSW services, and finally assembles
the partial results and returns them as RDF triples. As such,
TripleGeo-CSW exposes existing CSWs through a single SPARQL
endpoint, and enables systems to query distributed INSPIRE SDIs.
The software can be easily deployed in a web server as is; the
administrator only needs to specify the list of CSWs (i.e., their
publicly accessed URL) that will be queried for metadata. As such,
TripleGeo-CSW can be used for querying catalogues on-the-fly on a
regional, national, or even international (e.g., pan-European) level.
Note that TripleGeo-CSW does not provide services for querying
the spatial data of an SDI through SPARQL, which is a separate and
open area for research. Instead, it provides the first missing piece of

K. Patroumpas et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 5362

and their geometric shapes are modelled with vectors (points,
lines, polygons, etc.). However, this model can be extended to
accommodate more specific feature classes, e.g., roads or parcels,
with the addition of application-defined properties. The first
GML model (version 1.0) was based on RDF/RDFS profiles, but
afterwards the OGC introduced XML schemas for interoperability
with existing spatial databases. This means that automatic
transformation of data and metadata from GML 1.0 into RDF
was possible. Although this RDF profile is no longer supported,
subsequent GML models (current version is 3.3) still retain certain
features of RDF, most importantly the concept of child elements as
properties of a parent resource (RDFS).

Thanks to this relaxed triple-like binding, GML features may
be transformed into RDF. In our particular case, INSPIRE-aligned
schemas are available in GML for several Data Themes [37]. But, a
common methodology or guidelines for exposing such spatial data
as Linked Data have not yet been agreed upon.

Ongoing work on selected INSPIRE themes (like addresses, road
networks, or administrative units) for the ISA Location Core Vocabulary [38] focuses on rules for creating RDF vocabularies from UML
models; how to map UML stereotypes from spatial models into RDF
is not yet established. Currently, [38] provides a minimum set of
classes and properties for describing any place by its name, address
or geometry. Besides, a few small vocabularies [39] have been proposed by [40], having classes and properties that reflect those in
INSPIRE, and were tested on particular Data Themes, like protected
sites, land use, administrative units, cadastral parcels, etc.

In contrast to such abstract, model-based methodology, ours is
a data-centric approach, attempting to encode elements from GML
application schemas into RDF. Using XSL stylesheets for parsing
GML representations of INSPIRE-compliant features seems most
preferable and generic, as these scripts can be reused and work
with any XSLT parser. However, XSLT is not aware of the INSPIRE
vocabulary in order to convert e.g., a name into rdf:literal.
Therefore, we introduced one custom XSL stylesheet per INSPIRE
Data Theme (Annex I), practically translating each domain-specific
element from the respective GML schema into a RDF resource.

Thanks to such one-to-one mappings of every INSPIRE element into RDF, this transformation is lossless, with no information
missing from the resulting RDF triples. In addition, geometry serializations are compliant with the recent OGC GeoSPARQL standard.
For convenience, all XSL stylesheets we have prepared for INSPIRE
data and metadata have been integrated in our open-source software TripleGeo [41], enhancing its previous release [42]. Of course,
users may still use stylesheets in a standalone fashion (via any XSLT
processor), or even edit them to define suitable values for parameters according to the dataset(s) at hand, and then perform XSLT
transformations to obtain the resulting RDF triples.

In developing this methodology, we had to choose a proper
configuration for RDF resources, handle many different cases
in geometry representations (also due to earlier GML versions),
and also resolve certain inconsistencies in namespaces. Next, we
outline our approach to each of these challenging issues.

5.1. Specification of URIs

The most important requirement for exposing INSPIRE SDIs
as Linked Data is linking with http URIs. Object referencing and
associations are supported by INSPIRE Data Specifications [11],
but spatial datasets do not represent or maintain links. With a
few exceptions, such as the UK Location URI patterns [43] for
data.gov.uk, authorities publishing geodata do not currently
assign persistent URIs. Discussions continue between EU member
states and the Commission towards a common URI scheme [44].
This also requires suitable policies to manage assignment of http
URIs and reuse existing ones for already published resources.

Fig. 2. Processing flow for queries in TripleGeo-CSW.

the puzzle, i.e., enabling discovery of available geospatial data in an
SDI by repurposing its existing CSW. Exposing the actual geospatial
data through SPARQL endpoints that repurpose other SDI services
(like WMS or WFS), e.g., via an intermediate adapter [30,31], by
embedding links at the service level and content negotiation as
in [32], or towards semantic interoperability with a multi-purpose
enablement layer [33], are out of scope of our work.

The flow diagram of the process executed by TripleGeo-CSW is
illustrated in Fig. 2. Its input is a GeoSPARQL query specifying one
or more conditions according to the INSPIRE ontology with suitable DCAT mappings, as explained in Section 3. We implemented a
parser that identifies these conditions and is enhanced with capabilities of matching regular expressions (e.g.,  environment*).
Of course, conditions may include spatial filtering, e.g., to discover data within a region of
interest. We support typical
GeoSPARQL topological predicates [5] like sfIntersects(),
sfOverlaps(), sfWithin(), sfContains(), etc., which can
be translated into CSW spatial filters over rectangles. Indeed, our
major concern in a CSW request is its <Filter> element, which
controls whether metadata should be obtained according to specific criteria (not only spatial). Hence, the user-specified query conditions must be internally rewritten and then integrated into the
<Filter> element of a GetRecords request for CSW. Thanks to
CSW standardization, an identical such request will be submitted
simultaneously via POST HTTP protocol to each of the available cat-
alogues. As soon as each CSW provides its response as a collection
of qualifying metadata records in a separate XML file, the wrapper
will merge their contents. With the same stylesheet described in
Section 3, these metadata records (conforming to ISO 19115) are
finally converted into XML/RDF triples and can be made available
to the user. Of course, the final output will be INSPIRE-compliant
metadata, since XSLT uses templates that map each metadata element into DCAT elements.

Note that no graph is specified, as neither do we make use
of a physically stored semantic repository nor retain any RDF
triples permanently (i.e., harvesting). All results are generated on-
the-fly based on the response from CSWs. In essence, processing
components are wrapped under this virtual SPARQL endpoint, thus
offering the ability to interact directly with any number of remote
(but compatible to CSW) catalogues, and repurpose existing spatial
metadata. Full implementation details on TripleGeo-CSW can be
found in [34]; the source code is available at [35].

5. Transforming INSPIRE data into RDF

INSPIRE data models use UML at the conceptual level, whereas
the actual entities are encoded in GML according to INSPIRE
Implementing Rules [26]. Geography Markup Language (GML) is
an OGC standard [36] for representing geospatial information. The
basic primitives of GML are spatial features as locations on Earth,

Fig. 3. The location of Athens encoded as a point in GeoSPARQL. Note that coordinates are georeferenced in WGS84 (EPSG:4326) according to the Geodetic Parameter
Registry for CRS established in http://www.epsg-registry.org/.

In order to avoid non-resolvable URNs in the resulting triples,
we opt for a parametrized configuration of http URIs as in [43].
Orthogonal to approaches for persistent URIs [45], the general
pattern of our provisional URIs is

http://{domain}/id/{theme}/{dataSource}/
[{resourceType}/]{localId},

where {domain} is the owner or domain root of a dataset
(e.g., geodata.gov.gr for the Greek SDI); {theme} denotes the
class that a spatial entity belongs to (e.g., administrative units,
roads, etc.); {dataSource} is the dataset identifier in the national corpus of spatial data; and {localID} is a string identifier that could be the official code of the entity (e.g., municipality code, road code). Note that {localID} should not be confused with the gmlId of the respective GML feature, and may
not be necessarily equivalent to the composite inspireId required by INSPIRE. This {localId} should preferably be an official code that uniquely identifies the entity within the given
dataset, e.g., in municipalities it could be the official code assigned by the Ministry of Interior, for postal codes it could be
the code itself, etc. The optional {resourceType} can be used
to specify nested resources that depend on the main entity,
e.g., URIs for its geometry or inspireId. For example, the
URI for the municipality of Athens (having code 9186 under the
Kallikratis administrative subdivision of Greek municipalities) is
http://geodata.gov.gr/id/AdministrativeUnit/Kallikratis/9186,
http://
while its respective geometry is identified with URI
geodata.gov.gr/id/AdministrativeUnit/Kallikratis/geometry/9186.
Such provisional URIs may seem somewhat long, but this struc-
tured, self-explanatory notation outweighs compactness.

5.2. Assigning INSPIRE identifiers

There is no broad consensus on how to formulate inspireId,
i.e., the unique object identifiers published by the responsible body, such that each spatial object would be traceable in
pan-European SDIs. Instead of issuing a single numeric identi-
fier, we abide by the INSPIRE recommendations and we specify it by combining a namespace pertinent to the data provider
(e.g., GR.ELSTAT_AU for Kallikratis) with a localId for the feature (e.g., 9186 for Athens municipality in the previous example).
Because this identifier serves as an objects reference for external
applications, we suggest handling inspireId as a base RDF ele-
ment, with all such resources having the same prefix, no matter
their original Data Theme.

5.3. Geometry serializations

Another innovation of our approach is its full compliance with
GeoSPARQL [5]. This is basically achieved through an XSLT transform of the original 2-dimensional geometries from GML into
valid Well Known Text (WKT) serializations. Currently, our implemented XSL stylesheet can handle all basic shapes (Point,
MultiPoint,
Curve,
Polygon, MultiPolygon), as well as more complex OGC spatial
types
and
GeometryCollection)[46]. The resulting RDF statements also

MultiLineString,

MultiGeometry,

MultiSurface,

LineString,

(like

encode the coordinate reference system (CRS) along with each ge-
ometry, like the RDF/XML fragment in Fig. 3. Note that geometries are objects to the predicate <geo:hasGeometry>. The
GeoSPARQL vocabulary also defines a <geo:asWKT> property,
where the WKT serialization is attached as a geometry literal. The
original INSPIRE specification for geometries depends on the data
theme, e.g. <GN:geometry> for geographical names; for consis-
tency, we also include such triples in the results.

5.4. Converting thematic attributes

For most INSPIRE data themes in Annex I, like (AD) Addresses,
(GN) Geographical Names, etc., the GML application schemas [37]
are very detailed in their attempt to cover diverse cases for
entity representation that may arise across Europe. For example,
the level attribute in an AD:AddressLocator element could
correspond to a value like site level or postal delivery point or a
unit level locator, depending on national or regional regulations.
This entails a certain degree of customization in XSL stylesheets,
where we have chosen to reflect the original INSPIRE schema. All
facts, especially in RDF predicates, respect INSPIRE namespaces.
For instance, AU:nationalCode assigns the official code into
the resource denoting an administrative unit, even though an
RDF representation is not yet established for namespaces like
AU: <http:// inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/schemas/
au/3.0/>.

is one of

Language specification for string literals is another concern,
because supporting multi-lingual content
INSPIREs
objectives. In its schema specifications, attribute language in
geographical names is given according to ISO 6393 (i.e., threeletter codes like eng for English, ell for Greek, ita for
Italian, etc.). Instead, for language-tagged literals in RDF, a twoletter encoding (e.g., en, el, it) according to ISO 6391
must be utilized. Our XSL stylesheets can handle this case, as well
as multiple alphabets (e.g., most data in geodata.gov.gr is in
Greek), discriminate alternative spellings, etc.

The transformation should also account for voidable properties,
e.g., roads with no names. It is possible that no information exists
in the original dataset regarding several nillible attributes in the
INSPIRE schemas. For example, a name may be present for a
spatial entity, but further details about pronunciation, grammatical
gender, etc. may be missing. This yields RDF triples with blank
literals in objects, which inevitably increases the number of
statements.

5.5. Software deployment

The main entry point for transforming INSPIRE-compliant data
from GML into RDF is stylesheet Inspire_Main.xsl.
It is
basically a wrapper of all other XSL scripts available (e.g., for
handling geometries, geographical names, or specific INSPIRE data
themes). This allows the user to specify several XSL parameters
to configure the URIs that will describe the resulting resources,
namely:
 baseURI: the domain where that resource belongs to, as
explained in Section 5.1;

K. Patroumpas et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 5362

Table 2
Datasets from geodata.gov.gr exposed as INSPIRE-aligned RDF triples.

INSPIRE data theme
(GN) Geographical names
(AU) Administrative units
(AD) Addresses
(CP) Cadastral parcels
(TN) Transport networks
(HY) Hydrography
(PS) Protected sites

Greek dataset
Settlements, towns, localities
Municipalities
Street addresses in Kalamaria municipality
Building blocks in Kalamaria municipality
Urban road network in Kalamaria municipality
Rivers, waterstreams
Natura 2000 preservation sites
Total

Geometry type
Point
MultiPolygon
Point
MultiPolygon
LineString
MultiLineString
MultiPolygon

#Features

 theme: it describes the INSPIRE Data Theme and is extracted
from elements, e.g., Addresses;
 topic:
it specifies the data source as provided by the
stakeholder;
 datasetid: it is a dataset identifier extracted from the respective gmlId in the source file, as defined by the stakeholder.
For flexibility, users can also specify the preferred WKT in order to allow extraction of geometries according to several serializa-
tions, e.g., GeoSPARQL or Virtuoso (XSL parameter typeWKT). This
is extremely useful in case that the resulting triples will be loaded
into RDF stores that do not currently conform to GeoSPARQL specifications (e.g., Virtuoso).

In our implementation, XSL stylesheets for transforming
INSPIRE data to RDF rigorously reflect the schema of a particular
INSPIRE theme (e.g., Addresses, Cadastral Parcels, etc.). A stylesheet
may have dependencies on others in order to handle various
common elements, e.g., string literals used for naming spatial
entities (GeographicalNames.xsl), and particularly those
concerning geometric representations (GML2WKT.xsl).

We have made extensive use of these transformations over
Greek open geodata, as detailed next. Still, in order to verify
their suitability, we made additional tests on sample data from
other EU countries (geographical names and protected sites from
Italy; cadastral parcels in the UK; roads and addresses in the
Netherlands). We stress that it is not the data volume that matters,
but mostly its variety in attributes, geometries, and properties that
affect the amount and validity of such transformations.

6. Use case: exposing a real-world INSPIRE SDI through
(Geo)SPARQL endpoints

In this Section, we validate our methodology against a
real-world SDI that contains geospatial data and metadata for
Greece. The web service geodata.gov.gr was developed by
IMIS/Athena RC, under the auspices of the Prime Ministers
eGovernment Task Force with the purpose of promoting open
governmental data and assisting in the technical implementation
of the INSPIRE Directive in Greece. Actively used by 1000 users per
day since 2010, geodata.gov.gr offers open spatial data from
the public sector, across diverse thematic domains (e.g., protected
sites, census, placenames, water quality). Built entirely with opensource software, this SDI provides two main services: (i) a data
catalogue and (ii) interactive maps. The catalogue is the main
entrance point, enabling users to search and download geospatial
data in several formats (e.g. shapefiles, KML, GML). Full INSPIREcompliant metadata is also provided, created and validated using
the INSPIRE metadata editor [25]. Interactive web maps combine
vector data and raster imagery, providing access to all available
geospatial data.

Our proposed methodology for exposing INSPIRE to the Semantic Web necessitates that geospatial features are INSPIRE-aligned.
Although all metadata in geodata.gov.gr is fully compatible
with INSPIRE, data is not. In this use case, we have chosen to expose

representative datasets for seven themes in Annex I, as listed in Table 2. Next, we first report our experience from aligning Greek geodata to INSPIRE. Then, we apply our methodology for transforming
this INSPIRE-compliant data and metadata into RDF, and finally exposing them through (Geo)SPARQL endpoints.

6.1. Data alignment to INSPIRE Annex I

Despite their modest size, handling the data of Table 2 according to INSPIRE [11] posed several challenges. Primarily, the original
GML files had to become INSPIRE-aligned through schema map-
pings. To achieve this goal, we utilized the Humboldt Alignment
Editor [47], a powerful open-source tool with a graphical interface and a high-level language for expressing custom alignments.
This process only requires a source schema (an .xsd for the local
GML file) and a target one (an .xsd implementing an INSPIRE Data
Theme schema). This is a one-to-one mapping, whereby each element from the local GML schema is mapped to one in the INSPIRE
schema. In effect, this mapping depends on the variety of elements
in the local GML file, i.e., how many attributes are actually defined
per feature. Note that the editor not only exports the data, but the
attribute alignments as well. These schema mappings can be certainly reused for the same source data, e.g., in case of updates. Although this harmonization to INSPIRE was prepared for data from
geodata.gov.gr, it may be applied to similarly structured data
with necessary arrangements for conflicting or missing attributes.

6.2. Transforming features into linked data

Once data was harmonized to INSPIRE, it had to be transformed
into RDF. This process against such GML files was quite straight-
forward, given a set of suitable XSL stylesheets. We implemented
all these transformations in XSLT 2.0, developing one parametrized
stylesheet per data theme in Table 2. The only prerequisite was selection of appropriate URIs for the resulting resources, as discussed
in Section 5. In practice, the user should only fill in values for the
parameters involved, i.e., domain, theme, and dataSource. By
default, all geometries were encoded in WKT serializations according to GeoSPARQL.

The case was simpler for metadata according to the process
outlined in Section 3, since a common, general-purpose stylesheet
is applied to each XML file. In total, 475 metadata triples were
produced for all seven themes in Table 2.

As soon as the resulting RDF/XML files were derived, they could
be inserted into a triple store. We chose Parliament RDF [48],
which offers storage and search capabilities compliant with the
GeoSPARQL standard. We created one RDF graph to hold triples
of INSPIRE data, and another one for INSPIRE metadata, both
supported by spatial indices.

In addition, we set up two similar graphs in Virtuoso Universal Server [49], which offers a powerful query engine and a compressed column store representation for RDF. Although Virtuoso is
robust and highly scalable, and since version 7.1 includes support
for many geometry types, it is not yet GeoSPARQL-compliant and

Fig. 4. The web interface at http://geodata.gov.gr/sparql/ for submitting queries against INSPIRE-aligned RDF graphs.

has limited support for geospatial processing. We easily prepared
variant XSL stylesheets with the custom geometry representations
for Virtuoso, so as to reconvert all spatial features. This has proven
the versatility of our approach and its potential to support diverse
geometric serializations.

6.3. Interface to (Geo)SPARQL queries

Taking advantage of the embedded capabilities of the two RDF
stores (Parliament, Virtuoso), we were able to create endpoints
that expose INSPIRE data and metadata. Actually, we provide
two GeoSPARQL endpoints from Parliament (one for data, another
for metadata); two similar SPARQL endpoints are offered from
Virtuoso, also with geometric support, yet not conforming to
GeoSPARQL. There is one virtual SPARQL endpoint too, which
works on top of the TripleGeo-CSW middleware (Section 4).
In order to hide the differences between those five backends
and to expose a simple and uniform interface to the end-user,
we implemented a web application that provides the means to
issue (Geo)SPARQL queries and receive results in various formats
(RDF/XML, CSV, HTML, JSON, etc.).

This web interface (Fig. 4) is publicly available at
http://geodata.gov.gr/sparql/

and it is equipped with sample queries, short documentation on
the datasets and the transformation processes, as well as links to
the source code.
The application consists of two main modules:
 A client-side JavaScript application provides the web interface.
This allows users to select a backend (one of the SPARQL
engines), edit a query, specify a result format (e.g., JSON),
preview results, and even download them. Optionally, a user
may load one of the predefined queries against any of the
available RDF graphs and also edit it before submitting a request
to the server.
 A server-side PHP application acts both as an API proxy and
an abstraction layer, as shown in Fig. 5. Once it receives a
(Geo)SPARQL query, our proxy validates it. Next, it determines
which is the target backend, and builds the proper backendspecific request against the necessary graph. While the query is
being executed in the backend, a timeout timer is started. Once
results are returned, it sends them back to the web interface for
preview or downloading. In case of a timeout (if a query takes
more than 60 s to complete) or on a failed request, a diagnostic
error message is issued.

Fig. 5. Processing requests to diverse SPARQL endpoints.

6.4. Discussion

As an indication of the effort required to transform INSPIRE features into RDF and provide them through (Geo)SPARQL endpoints,
Table 3 contains some performance measurements compiled
through our case study. Regarding INSPIRE data, we observed that
the cost varies depending on the amount of input features (listed
in Table 2), as well as on the complexity of the geometries therein.
For instance, transforming the 326 administrative units takes almost three times more compared to the 10776 address points.
But, given that the geometry of each administrative unit may consist of hundreds of vertices, the transformation cost increases ac-
cordingly. Nevertheless, note that the total cost of transforming all
seven datasets into RDF is barely over 20 s, about 50% less than the
actual loading of the data into a triple store; in this particular case,
importing the data into Virtuoso Universal Server takes 31.5 s. We
stress that this is a one-off process that is completed once the data
is transformed into RDF and loaded into a triple store. It should
be repeated only if the underlying data sources have changed or a
newly added dataset needs to be transformed.

More or less, the situation is similar regarding INSPIRE-aligned
metadata, also listed in Table 3. The amount of resulting metadata
triples from each theme varies a little, since datasets provide a
diverse number of keywords that characterize each one of them.
Hence, there is little fluctuation in the transformation cost, which
is kept very low (about 4.7 s to transform all metadata). Note that

K. Patroumpas et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 5362

Table 3
Performance of transforming INSPIRE features to RDF and loading them into Virtuoso triple store.

INSPIRE data theme

(GN) Geographical names
(AU) Administrative units
(AD) Addresses
(CP) Cadastral parcels
(TN) Transport networks
(HY) Hydrography
(PS) Protected sites
Totals

Data
#triples

Transformation (ms)

Loading (ms)

Metadata
#triples

Transformation (ms)

Loading (ms)

the time to load these metadata triples into the store is significantly
reduced compared to the case of data triples. This is expectable, due
to the very small amount of metadata triples (475 in total).

Regarding performance of metadata discovery, we measured
the cost incurred for transforming into RDF the XML response
returned from CSWs. Of course, we excluded transmission delays
as well as the processing time for the request (query Q8 in
the Appendix) at each remote CSW. On average, 194 metadata
elements were returned in 2.6 s, which is quite affordable for such
on-the-fly transformations.

Not surprisingly, the resulting tuples outnumber the original
features by far. Naturally, the attributes (identifiers, names, clas-
sifications, etc.) of each input feature get extracted into separate
triples. But most importantly, each input feature inflates into a
varying number of triples depending on the details prescribed by
the underlying INSPIRE schema for each theme. For instance, the
name of a geographical entity results not into a single triple with
the string literal as its object, but it is also associated with several
other triples regarding the language, pronunciation, spelling, etc.
of this particular name. This is only an example about the level of
detail in the underlying INSPIRE schema. Nonetheless, we have deliberately abided by this schema and avoided introducing an ontology of our own, since this schema is expected to become a panEuropean standard by 2020 and thus, transformation of any available data or metadata into RDF would be straightforward.

One final remark concerns our experience from querying the
graphs created in each triple store. As can be verified from several
example (Geo)SPARQL statements listed in the Appendix, queries
tend to be quite verbose, mainly because they must reflect the
underlying INSPIRE schema for the data themes involved, as
explained before. This may incur too many triple bindings during
evaluation and thus increased response times. We observed that
some queries in Parliament take much longer to execute than their
counterparts in Virtuoso over the same datasets, mainly because
of the limitations of Parliaments query engine. But, we stress that
such issues relate to the capabilities of the underlying triple stores
implementing the endpoints and have nothing to do with our
methodology.

Both TripleGeo and TripleGeo-CSW have been showcased
with real-world examples at a workshop [50] that we coorganized at the INSPIRE  World Geospatial Forum 2015. This
community meeting also confirmed that researchers (like [40,
51]) and practitioners have tested or even made use of these
tools for exposing and discovering INSPIRE data and metadata
on the Semantic Web. More technical details about the data
transformation, usage instructions, deployment issues, and many
more representative queries are publicly available in [52].

7. Conclusions and perspectives

In this paper, we reported our experience towards repurposing
the legally mandated and investment-intensive INSPIRE SDIs as
high quality Linked Data sources. First, we have successfully

enabled users to search for available INSPIRE data, by providing
a virtual SPARQL interface for CSWs. This means that all INSPIRE
Catalogue Services are accessible with Semantic Web technologies
and thus INSPIRE data are discoverable. Further, we have
developed a reusable transformation of INSPIRE metadata to RDF.
As such, INSPIRE metadata can be automatically made available as
RDF, for all such metadata available currently or in the future. Last,
but not least, we have introduced a methodology for transforming
INSPIRE Annex I data to RDF, and offering it through GeoSPARQL
endpoints. This methodology may be applied as is to Annex I data
across the EU, and is inherently extensible for Annex II & III data
by simply authoring extra XSLT transformations. By integrating
support to INSPIRE into the open-source TripleGeo suite, we
provided a single utility enabling any geospatial data (standards-
compliant or not) to be transformed to RDF and exposed through
GeoSPARQL.

Overall, we demonstrated that exposing the entire spectrum of
INSPIRE features as RDF through GeoSPARQL endpoints is possible,
with relatively little work. This may have significant impact for
the GIS and Semantic Web communities. On the one hand, GIS
researchers and practitioners can be acquainted with the advanced
capabilities that Semantic Web technologies can offer, and also
harness the wealth of LOD for novel applications. On the other
hand, the Semantic Web can be seamlessly enriched with diverse,
official, and high-quality geospatial data. As INSPIRE licensing
is gradually conforming to open knowledge licences, we may
envisage a LOD cloud with interlinked official and crowdsourced
data, thus opening immense opportunities for novel value added
services.

Our work opens many challenging opportunities. First, apart
from adding transformations for Annex II & III data, we aim to
apply domain-specific knowledge about the application schema in
order to improve mapping, also taking into account established
vocabularies, such as Dublin Core and SKOS. Another area we
would like to explore concerns interlinking of INSPIRE RDF data
with LOD sources, and consequently applying our data fusion
framework FAGI [9] to produce new datasets of enhanced accuracy
and coverage. Of special interest is interlinking and fusion of
OpenStreetMap data [53] with relevant INSPIRE data sources. We
believe this process will provide beneficial solutions regarding
multi-linguality, data integration and content quality.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by the European Commission
under FP7-ICT-2011-8 grant #318159 GeoKnow  Making the Web
an Exploratory Place for Geospatial Knowledge and FP7-ICT-2013-
SME-DCA grant #609608 PublicaMundi  Scalable and Reusable
Open Geospatial Data. We also wish to thank Andrea Perego and
Michael Lutz (European Commission  JRC) for helpful discussions
regarding RDF mappings of INSPIRE-aligned metadata.

Appendix

Next, we list a few representative (Geo)SPARQL queries that can
be submitted against the sample RDF graphs at http://geodata.gov.
gr/sparql/.

A.1. Queries on INSPIRE metadata

Q1: The following SPARQL query identifies the latest update of each
dataset after 2011. Since this may involve new datasets, as well
as updates in existing ones (before 2011), results come from their
union:
SELECT ?dataURI ?title (MAX(?date) AS ?lastModified)
WHERE {

{ ?dataURI dct:title ?title .
?dataURI dct:created ?date }

{ ?dataURI dct:title ?title .

?dataURI dct:modified ?date }

FILTER

( ?date >= "2011-01-01"^^xsd:date )

GROUP BY ?dataURI ?title
ORDER BY ASC(?lastModified);

Q2: The following query finds metadata that contain a given
keyword in their subject. Then,
it returns details about the
qualifying datasets (such as title, subject, URL, etc.):
SELECT ?dataURI ?title ?details ?key ?subject ?homeURL
WHERE {

?dataURI dct:title ?title .
?dataURI dct:subject ?subject .
?dataURI dct:description ?details .
?dataURI dcat:landingPage ?homeURL .
?dataURI dcat:keyword ?key .
FILTER (REGEX(?subject, "^environment*", "i"))
};

Q3: The following query can be used to discover datasets with total
spatial extent (i.e., a rectangular envelope) overlapping the given
area of interest:
SELECT ?dataURI ?title ?details

(geof:envelope(?fWKT) AS ?totalExtent)

WHERE {

?dataURI dct:title ?title .
?dataURI dct:description ?details .
?dataURI dct:spatial ?extent .
?extent locn:geometry ?fWKT .
FILTER (geof:sfIntersects (geof:envelope(?fWKT),

"POLYGON((21.46 37.96, 22.73 37.96, 22.73 39.11,
21.46 39.11, 21.46 37.96))"^^geo:wktLiteral) )

};
Note that the area is specified as a polygon in the default

coordinate system WGS84 (EPSG:4326).

A.2. Queries on INSPIRE-aligned data

Q4: Find rivers (INSPIRE theme: Hydrography) that intersect with
Natura 2000 areas (INSPIRE theme: Protected Sites):
SELECT ?riverName ?siteName
WHERE {

?q hy-n:geographicalName ?r .
?r gn:GeographicalName ?rnName .
?rnName gn:spelling ?rspn .
?rspn gn:SpellingOfName ?rspt .
?rspt gn:text ?riverName .
?q geo:hasGeometry ?qGeom .
?qGeom geo:asWKT ?qWKT .
?f ps:siteName ?p .
?p gn:GeographicalName ?gnName .
?gnName gn:spelling ?spn .
?spn gn:SpellingOfName ?spt .

?spt gn:text ?siteName .
?f geo:hasGeometry ?fGeom .
?fGeom geo:asWKT ?fWKT .
FILTER (geof:sfIntersects(?fWKT, ?qWKT))
};

Obviously, this query performs a join between the two datasets
based on spatial
intersection of their respective geometries.
Evaluation is supported by the underlying spatial indices, so that
the expensive cost of checking each protected zone (i.e., a polygon
or multipolygon [46]) against each river (a linestring) is avoided if
they are geographically distant from each other.
Q5:
Identify which municipality (from INSPIRE data theme:
Administrative Units) is at a specific location, e.g., at coordinates
(40.582051, 22.952149):

SELECT ?nCode ?aName
WHERE {

?f au:nationalCode ?nCode .
?f au:name ?a .
?a gn:GeographicalName ?gnName .
?gnName gn:spelling ?spn .
?spn gn:SpellingOfName ?spt .
?spt gn:text ?aName .
?f geo:hasGeometry ?fGeom .
?fGeom geo:asWKT ?fWKT .
FILTER (geof:sfContains(?fWKT,

"<http://www.opengis.net/def/crs/EPSG/0/4326>
POINT (40.582051 22.952149)"^^geo:wktLiteral))

};

This is similar to a mouse click on a digital map, whereby the
query processor searches for any polygon geometry that topologically contains (geof:sfContains) the given point. Also note that
the location is specified in WGS84 projection system (EPSG:4326
with lon/lat coordinates in decimal degrees), whereas the data has
been actually stored in GreekGrid87 (EPSG:2100, with coordinates in metres). So, the processing engine should support diverse
coordinate reference systems (CRS).
Q6: Find all address locations within 2 km distance from a specific
point of interest:

SELECT ?tName ?addNum ?pCode ?dist
WHERE {

?f ad:locator ?aLoc .
?aLoc ad:AddressLocator ?addDes .
?addDes ad:designator ?aDes .
?aDes ad:LocatorDesignator ?aLocDes .
?aLocDes ad:designator ?addNum .
?f ad:component ?cp .
?cp ad:postCode ?pCode .
?f ad:component ?r .
?r ad:name ?thName .
?thName gn:GeographicalName ?rnName .
?rnName gn:spelling ?rspn .
?rspn gn:SpellingOfName ?rspt .
?rspt gn:text ?tName .
?f ad:position ?addr .
?addr ad:GeographicPosition ?aPos .
?aPos geo:hasGeometry ?fGeom .
?fGeom geo:asWKT ?fWKT .
BIND(geof:distance(?fWKT,

"<http://www.opengis.net/def/crs/EPSG/0/4326>
POINT (40.582051 22.952149)"^^geo:wktLiteral,
uom:metre) AS ?dist) .

FILTER (?dist < 2000)

ORDER BY ?dist;

Note that INSPIRE data theme Addresses prescribes several
different formats for address features, according to national or
regional variations. For the data used in this example, addresses
are composed of street name, house number, and postal code.

K. Patroumpas et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 5362

A.3. Queries against INSPIRE-compliant CSWs

Q7: Identify any datasets across Europe that are characterized by a
given subject (Environment) and their title includes a particular
word or phrase (e.g., network). Observe that matching of strings
(for dataset title) is based on regular expressions:

CONSTRUCT { ?s dc:subject ?sub .

?m dc:title ?k }

WHERE {

?s dc:subject "Environment" .
?m dc:title ?k .
FILTER ( REGEX( str(?k), "*network*" ) )
};

Q8: Issuing the following GeoSPARQL query will retrieve INSPIRE
metadata (collected from any of the CSWs listed in the middle-
ware) within a given geographic rectangle:

CONSTRUCT { ?s geo:geometry ?fWKT }
WHERE {

?s geo:geometry ?fWKT .
FILTER (geof:sfWithin(?fWKT,
"BOX2D(-14.1 34.25, 35.42 70.4)"^^geo:wktLiteral))
};
Our TripleGeo-CSW middleware rewrites this query into an
equivalent GetRecords request according to OGC specifications,
which is then automatically submitted to each of the available
CSWs. Note that currently, TripleGeo-CSW only supports geometric comparisons on 2-dimensional rectangles (BOX2D). Finally, all
resulting triples are generated on-the-fly based on the XML response received from CSWs.

A.4. List of namespaces

Namespaces regarding metadata catalogues:

dcat: <http://www.w3.org/ns/dcat#>
dct: <http://purl.org/dc/terms/>
locn: <http://www.w3.org/ns/locn#>
xsd: <http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#>
Namespaces for GeoSPARQL operations:

geo: <http://www.opengis.net/ont/geosparql#>
geof: <http://www.opengis.net/def/geosparql/function/>
uom: <http://www.opengis.net/def/uom/OGC/1.0/>
Namespaces for INSPIRE data themes (Annex I):

ad: <http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/schemas/ad/3.0/>
au: <http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/schemas/au/3.0/>
cp: <http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/schemas/cp/3.0/>
gn: <http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/schemas/gn/3.0/>
hy-n: <http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/schemas/hy-n/3.0/>
ps: <http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/schemas/ps/3.0/>
tn: <http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/schemas/tn/3.0/>
