Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 34 (2015) 1326

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Neighborhood-user profiling based on perception relationship in the
micro-blog scenario
Jianxing Zheng a, Bofeng Zhang a,, Xiaodong Yue a, Guobing Zou a, Jianhua Ma b,
Keyuan Jiang c
a School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, China
b Faculty of Computer and Information Sciences, Hosei University, Japan
c Department of Computer Information Technology & Graphics, Purdue University Calumet, IN, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 7 September 2014
Received in revised form
25 June 2015
Accepted 26 June 2015
Available online 3 July 2015

Keywords:
Micro-blog
Ontology
Resource perception relationship
Follow perception relationship
Neighborhood-user profile

In the micro-blog scenario, personal user profiling relying on content is limited for recommending desired
diverse subjects due to its shortcomings of short text, often leading to a poor recall. Currently, many
methods only utilized the personal knowledge from each individual user to represent user profile without
considering the neighborhood information. However, resource information related to neighboring friends
play an important role in improving the performance of recommender systems. In this paper, we present
the personalized expanded user profiling for micro-blog subject recommendation via ontology semantics
structure. Next, taking into account diffusion ability of followee friends, we discuss resource perception
relationship (RPR) and follow perception relationship (FPR). Finally, we discuss how, by adjusting the
importance of RPR and FPR, the neighborhood is selected to construct neighborhood-user profile, which
can mine new relevant subjects for target user. Our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our neighborhood-user profiling in comparison to the existing collaborative filtering and personal user
profile recommendation approaches on Sina micro-blog platform datasets.

 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Nowadays, as a newly emerged communication tool and public
medium on the Internet, micro-blog spreads popular hot topics
from one user to millions of individuals just in a few minutes,
which allows the user to receive desired information anytime and
anywhere. Meanwhile, searching for personalized interests and
feelings posted to the multi-source information platforms, such
as micro-blog systems like Twitter, social network sites including
Facebook and LinkedIn, and personal homepages and blogs as
well as many others [1,2], is an interesting yet challenging task.
Especially, in the micro-blog system platforms, people repost a lot
of short messages about their daily activities and feelings so as to
maintain latest interests or friendship.

Many researchers have successfully tested feasibility of applications in many areas including interesting topics [3] and micro-blog
environments [4]. However, personal User Profile (UP) is a cus-

 Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: jxzheng185@gmail.com (J. Zheng), bfzhang@shu.edu.cn
(B. Zhang), yswantfly@shu.edu.cn (X. Yue), guobingzou@gmail.com (G. Zou),
jianhua@hosei.ac.jp (J. Ma), jiang@purduecal.edu (K. Jiang).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.06.005
1570-8268/ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

tomized model of interest representing and reasoning for a user,
which is implicitly contained and generated from ones behav-
iors, browsing contents, or feedbacks [57]. That is, how to fulfill
personalized activities and information requirements with ones
micro-blog user profile is an important yet challenging issue. Very
little research, however, has been done on this issue.

In the micro-blog scenario, each micro-blog is short and lacks
sufficient information for user profile construction. As is expected,
a user profile is not only generated from individual short messages,
but also profits from existing interactions of friends [810]. With
more than 215 million users and more than 175 million postings
per day in 2012, Twitter is one of the most prominent micro-blog
services on the web [11]. In particular, most of users are used to
forwarding tweets for communication, instead of directly posting.
Hence, followees make an important role in the propagation and
spread of personalized interests. Traditional user profiles capture
personal interests over ones own knowledge [1215], which are
not holistic for discovering diverse information. In this case, items
and products in user profiles could not reflect currently concerned
subjects and socially propagative topics thoroughly.

In many scenarios, traditional collaborative filtering (CF) strategy provides users a lot of valuable information on the basis of mutual understanding and knowing. In social communities such as

J. Zheng et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 34 (2015) 1326

Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter, the solution of CF is challenging.
First, sparse data derived from short text is insufficient to capture
enough similar users to recommend desired items, which hurt both
the precision and recall of recommender systems. Second, pluralistic society makes people generate diverse interests. Not only are
users restricted to daily monotonous interesting item, but they
may be interested in diverse items posted by their friends [16].
A vast amount of diverse data enables similarity between users is
small, which also leads the capture of similar users is hard. Mean-
while, a small amount of similar users is difficult to discover the
items of the high correlation, which cannot effectively be applied
into CF strategy [9]. Actually, when we follow what the followees
have written, we can reflect our interests in a tracking way; and
when we glimpse other followees or communities, we can realize where the interests come from. Follow friends knowledge is a
kind of effective collective wisdom, which could extend personal
interest to other latent but relevant subjects. Additionally, follow
relation is a new back-to-back linkage, which can supply the target
user diverse interests from collaborative users [9,17]. It is reasonable that these follow friends contain a group of intimate interest
users, named as neighborhood. Therefore, neighborhood with sufficient knowledge could help an individual user build the Neighborhood User Profile (NUP), addressing the problem of information
shortage in representing personal interest.

In this work, we, using Sina micro-blog data source, constructed
novel neighborhood user profile based on the collective knowl-
edge. First, taking into account roles of followee friends in the interest propagation of the target user, we investigated the follow
perception relationship and resource perception relationship. Fur-
thermore, by adjusting the importance of two kinds of relation-
ships, we discovered the neighborhood of a user. Lastly, the NUP
relying on neighbor interests is proposed. In addition, the proposed
NUP is evaluated by comparing against the existing personal UP
and CF recommendation methods through experiments on large
amounts of data from the Sina micro-blog platform.

Our experimental results show that the proposed NUP approach
outperforms other methods in both precision and recall but with a
relatively higher time complexity. By analyzing the expanded interests by NUP, we have observed that the recommendations based
on NUP can accelerate the diffusion of the user interest, especially
some semantically related interest between friends. We introduce
the idea of neighborhood to solve the problem of acquiring behavior interest of social users. In particular, with the consideration of both the roles of followees friends and resource perception
relationship equally, the selected neighborhood could expand semantic interest efficiently. When the neighborhood only includes
oneself, the NUP becomes a conventional individual user profile.
However, the zooming size of neighborhood is an important issue
for interest supplement related to social networks and social Webs,
which needs to leverage the adaptive diversification fusion algorithm for zooming-in and zooming-out of the neighborhood.

The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses the works related to user profile. In Section 3, an overview of our recommendation framework based on
neighborhood user profile is presented. In Section 4, we introduce
personal interest acquiring method. Concepts of neighborhood and
detailed descriptions of interest extending in neighborhood user
profile are presented in Section 5. In Section 6, we demonstrate the
application of our system as well as our experiment results along
with discussions on strength and limitations. Finally, we conclude
in Section 7 directions of our future work.

2. A brief review of UP works

In the scenario of user profile construction, how to convert the
raw micro-blog documents into users interesting subjects is usually challenging. To exactly recommend appropriate products to

the user, many researchers have published their works in discovering demonstrated ways to build user profiles [1820,1214,10,
21,22]. In this section, we will briefly review some popular works
related to user profile.

2.1. Content-based UP

Content-based user profile focuses on document content analysis to classify the categorization of browsing historical records
for deriving the hot interest and meaningful subjects for a target
user. Many researches use individual information from the current search session or personal information to construct UP [23].
Via the key word set from ones comments and article, Meguebli
et al. [13] built a user profile and article profile for each user, and
computed the similarity between the article profile and user profile to sort the recommendation article list. By taking full advantage
of informal and unstructured labeled data in Tweets, Lim [8] proposed a LDA-based Twitter Opinion Topic Model (TOTM) to aggregate or summarize opinions of a product, which can discover target
specific opinion words and improve opinion prediction. Instead of
employing a human-generated ontology, Harvey [14] proposed a
novel latent topic models to describe both the clicked URLs and the
interests of users from click log data. Considering the characteristics of short text messages expressing users opinions and interests,
Esparza [24] described users and products from the terms used in
abbreviated and highly personalized commentary and studied how
Twitter-like short-form messages could be leveraged as a source
of indexing and retrieval information. Lin [15] utilized a semisupervised variant of LDA that accounts for both text and metadata to characterize version features into a set of latent topics for
exploring UP modeling in the app domain. By adopting features including user interest match, content-dependent user relationship
and user influence, Wang [9] proposed a machine learned ranking function to find a new interest group of users for newly twitter information diffusion. Although these works have obtained the
remarkable achievements, the existing user profiling methods are
not fit for micro-blog users. In the micro-blog scenario, traditional
UP methods capture too sparse interests to permit robust personalization and only recommend limited subjects for users diverse
needs. In this work we focus on the roles of social relationships between users for user profiling as they provide a richer source of
information about the users sufficient interests and preferences.

2.2. Semantics-based UP

Semantics-based user profile focuses on researching the
semantic linkages of blogs or articles to discover a users interest.
Based on clustering the keywords from the electronic academic
publications in online service, Tang [10] focuses on extending
scientific subject ontology to refine user interest profiling.
Varga [25] introduced a new semantic graph, called category meta-
graph, to extract a more fine grained categorization of concepts
to provide a set of novel semantic features from short text
messages. As the cosine similarity and TFIDF weighting scheme
for terms occurring in news messages are used in most user
profiles, Hogenboom [26] extended semantics based weighting
techniques, BingSFIDF+, by considering the synset semantic
relationships and by employing named entity similarities using
Bing page counts, to perform better of F1 than TFIDF and SFIDF
methods. For the hierarchical semantic structure embedded in the
query and the document, Huang [27] used a deep neural network
(DNN) to rank a set of documents for a given query and proposed a
series of Deep Structured Semantic Models (DSSM) for Web search.
Tao [21] constructed user profiles based on the ontology with
world knowledge and user local knowledge, and utilized semantic
specificity of concept in each ontology layer to mine users

Fig. 1. Overview framework of recommendation based on NUP.

semantic interest. Cantador [22] clustered those personal semantic
ontology user profiles from the tastes and preferences expressed
by users to discover specific types of Community. Particularly, all
these works indulge in semantics research in terms of vertical
categories for personal user profile, and they did not take into
consideration the semantic relationship of horizontal categories.

2.3. Relationship between UPs

Similar relationship between users has been studied over past
years [17]. Group-based recommendation has been one of the most
powerful techniques in collaborative filtering. By exploiting two
levels of geographical neighborhood characteristics from location
perspective, Liu [28] proposed a novel approach, namely InstanceRegion Neighborhood Matrix Factorization (IRenMF) for location
recommendation, which yields a more accurate modeling of users
preferences on locations. In order to explore and model the
structure correlations among users and items, Wang [29] designed
a hierarchical group matrix factorization (HGMF) method for item
recommendation. Aiming to reduce data sparsity and discover the
latent characteristics of communities, Zhao [30] devised an LDAbased method for user recommendation in Twitter-style social
networks.

Interactions among users in social networks also attracted a
lot of attention [16]. By exploiting the social features of social
folksonomies, Nocera [31,32] provided an enhanced user with
recommendations of similar users and potentially interesting resources based on involved users and resources. Taking into account
relations between friends in a large-scale real-world social net-
work, Zhou [33] found that semantic web community evolves in
a speckled fashion which is a highly distributed form. Based on
identifying potential information flowing between nodes in a university email network, Kossinets [34] proposed a framework in
order to analyze communication in networks. By analyzing the
user-generated contents and opinions of their friends, Bao [35]
explored a social probabilistic matrix factorization model to predict users potential interests, which helps micro-blogging provide
users with better personalized information services.

As described above, content-based approaches in the microblog scenario for recommendations have a low precision as tweet

contents are typically short and noisy, while collaborative filtering
approaches lead to a higher precision but data sparsity. Particu-
larly, most mentioned researchers emphasize on recommending
articles or products in terms of friends roles in information diffusion while ignoring friends important effects in the process of
interest construction. In this paper, we consider roles of followee
friends to find target users interest and build NUP for the microblog recommendation.

3. Recommendation framework based on NUP

The NUP aims to discover a users personal interest and discover
his/her neighbor interests from followee friends and their similar
resources. Illustrated in Fig. 1 is the overview of recommendation
based on neighborhood user profile. As shown in Fig. 1, the personal user profile is obtained by integration of content interest and
semantic interest. Then, personal interests can be accumulated in
terms of semantics of the ontology category structure in order to
form Expanded User Profile (EUP). Moreover, considering the social
cognitive relationship between users, neighborhood can be discovered for stating target users interest. Corresponding expanded
user profile is modeled for each user in the neighborhood, as
neighbor EUPs. Combining the personal EUP and EUPs from neigh-
borhood, the intrinsic and latent interest of the target user is discovered and neighborhood user profile is modeled for effectively
social recommendation.

The recommendation system mainly includes three steps. First,
personal micro-blogs are used to acquire content interest. Addi-
tionally, based on the semantic specificity of the subject in ontology structure, personal UP is then constructed by considering the
depth and width of the subject. Furthermore, using the subjects
with the strongest semantic specificity, taking into account their
content interest degrees in personal UP, personal EUP is generated
by expanding the subjects and computing their interest degree in
a vertical way at one level deep.

Second, similarity of users based on micro-blog resources is utilized to represent resource perception relationship (RPR). Simul-
taneously, similarity based on follow friend set is used to define
follow perception relationship (FPR). By adjusting the relative
weight of RPR and FPR, neighborhood of the target user is discov-
ered. Then, EUP for each user in neighborhood is modeled so as to

J. Zheng et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 34 (2015) 1326

update target users EUP by taking into account the relevance of
subjects and attention degree of subjects. That is, close subjects in
semantics from neighborhood are added to the latent interests of
the target user for building neighborhood user profile.

Finally, the system recommends top k subjects based on the
rank of interest degree in neighborhood user profile. This allows
a chance to instantly receive common subjects derived from intimate friends and expand users personal interests. The micro-blogs
related to the above subjects are then pushed to the target user.

4. Personal interest extraction

In this section, we first model the personal content interest with
TFIDF weighting mechanism from micro-blogs. Then, we identify
personal UP by considering the semantics of subjects and expand
latent subjects in terms of ontology category structure.

4.1. Content interest acquisition

In the micro-blog scenario, there are numerous messages usually containing various opinions, which are difficult to be classified into appropriate categorizations. Many Web documents
classification methods have been widely studied [36]. Here, we use
message features (i.e., the term weighting scheme [37]) to analyze
micro-blog texts. We use the data collected from Sina micro-blog
platform to construct the dictionary and extract significant subjects and terms. In addition, the dictionary is updated regularly by
crawling latest micro-blogs to ensure the accuracy of the corpus.
Specifically, we consider personal local knowledge as a group of
micro-blogs and each micro-blog m can be represented as a set of
subject terms and corresponding weight, shown in Eq. (1).
m = {(t1, w1m), (t2, w2m), . . . , (tp, wpm)}.

(1)
The term frequency (TF) for term t in micro-blog m is calculated

freqtm

maxl(freqlm)

as:
tftm =
where freqtm is the raw term frequency of t in micro-blog m and
maxl(freqlm) is the frequency number of term l which has the
maximum frequency in m. The inverse document frequency (IDF)
for term t is defined as:
idft = log
where Nm is the total number of micro-blogs and nt is the number
of micro-blogs that contains term t. Hence, the relative importance
of term t to m can be formulated as:
wtm = tftm  idft .

(4)
Furthermore, the similarity between two micro-blogs by means

Nm
nt

(2)

of the cosine measure can be defined as follows:
sim(mi, mj) =

mi  mj
mi  mj .

Fig. 2. Part of information categories on four topics.

users interest subjects, the interest degree of some subject in each
category for each user can be modeled by the ontology category
solution. According to the category structure, we can model users
interest tree and expand semantic related interest subjects. Fig. 2
shows part of categories structure related to the four topics, and
we assume that there is a kind of part-of relation from a child node
to the ancestor node.

As a powerful mechanism, ontology was proposed as a popular
definition of an explicit specification of a conceptual model by Gruber [38]. Many researchers captured relational domain knowledge
and developed personalized domain ontologies [39,40]. According
to the Dewey decimal classification, King et al. [41] applied IntelliOnto in the field of distributed web information retrieval in order
to improve the performance quality. Sieg et al. [42] used the Open
Directory Project to create personalized ontologies for specifying
users preference and interest in web search. Downey et al. [43] developed Wikipedia to study user interest in queries. Also, we define
domain ontology knowledge with Wikipedia categories to help individual users to discover semantic user profiles. Because ontology
construction is beyond the scope of this paper, we focus primarily
on the classification information of ontology. The primitive parts
in Fig. 2 can be formally defined as follows.
Definition 1. Let 3-tuple  = (S, R, A) be an ontology, where S
is the set of subjects; R is the set of relation types; A is the set of
axioms that includes some rules and restrictions that constrain the
attributes of subject object or relation.

Definition 2. Let R be a set of relations. S is a set of subjects.
r s2, then we define s1 has a relation
s1, s2  S, r  R, if s1
r to s2.

(3)

Here, r is a kind of part-of relation from a child node to the

ancestor node in Fig. 2.

According to the four topics and their subject classification in-
formation, we infer personal content interest degree of subject s
based on all the micro-blogs involved in the topic C. Given all the
micro-blogs involved in subject s(s  S), we can calculate content
interest degree on subject s for user u as Eq. (6):


mMC

mMC


siS

wsm  (s, m)
wsim  (si, m)

Cidu(s) =

(5)

(6)

With the similarity between micro-blogs, we obtain k-nearest
neighbors for each micro-blog at adjusted threshold coefficient
from the corpus training set. By considering the topic with the most
number of neighboring samples, the target micro-blog can be divided into the appointed appropriate topic with KNN algorithm. At
last, each micro-blog is partitioned into one of predefined topics
such as Economy, IT, Sports and Culture, which are from categorization corpus of Sogou Lab Data. The length of the sample document vector was set 30 and the value of parameter k was set 15 to
help discriminate the category of the micro-blog. After obtaining

where MC
u represents the micro-blog set reposted by user u over
topic C. (s, m) = 1 if s  m; otherwise (s, m) = 0. Similarly,
(si, m) = 1 if si  m; otherwise (si, m) = 0.

4.2. Personal UP based on content

4.2.1. Semantic coverage degree of subject

The approach of ontology semantic mining mainly focuses on
hierarchical semantics relations. In our approach, we argue that

semantic coverage degree (Scd) of a subject involves two aspects:
vertical semantic coverage (Vsc) and horizontal semantic coverage
(Hsc). Generally, a higher Vsc indicates that the subject is of high
significance in specific search, while a higher Hsc states that the
subject category is more ramose and feasible in wide search of sub-
ject.

For a specific subject in an ontology structure, Algorithm 1 gives

the procedure which calculates its semantic coverage degree.

Algorithm 1 Semantic coverage degree calculation.
Input:
ontology  = (S, R, A), a coefficient 1 <  < 2.

return;

Scd(s) applied to ontology.

Output:
1: get the root set S0 of S from , for s  S0, set Scd(s) = 1;
2: remove S0, get the new root nodes set S from ;
3: if (S == ) then
4:
5: end if
6: for each s  S do
get the parent node s0 of s;
r s0 then
if s
compute vertical semantic coverage degree Vsc(s) =  
Scd(s0);
end if
get the sibling nodes set Ss of s;
compute horizontal semantic coverage degree Hsc(s) =
log(1 + |Ss|);
compute semantic coverage degree Scd(s) = Vsc(s) 
Hsc(s);

10:
11:
12:

7:
8:
9:

13:

14: end for
15: S0 = S0  S, go to step 2.

For the semantic coverage degree of a subject in Algorithm 1,
we consider two important assumptions about the subject density.
First, as stated in [23], the subjects at upper levels toward the root
are more abstract than those at lower levels toward the leaves. The
lower level subjects will have more comprehensible concepts than
upper level subjects in web search. Thus, the Vsc of a subject at a
lower level should be greater than that of one at its upper level,
which is reflected by the coefficient operation . Obviously, in step
9, the definition of Vsc states that semantics increases recursively.
Second, a subject with more child nodes is more specific and understandable than that with fewer descendants for a disciplinary area,
which displays more semantic coverage ability. That is, the Hsc of
a subject should be larger than that of one with fewer descendants,
which is represented by calculation of logarithmic operation log. In
step 12, the assignment of Hsc reflects that the rise of semantics.
Hence, we can design the semantic coverage degree of each subject
with the logarithmic running time of the number of ontology tree
nodes.

In above algorithm, the semantic coverage degree is becoming
larger and larger with the increasing depth of subject, which makes
remarkable discrimination for two detailed specified subjects in
lower nodes. Actually, the semantics of lower specified subjects are
closer than that of upper subjects. Thanks to this long tail, we normalize the Scd values to the range [0, 1] to distinguish semantics
between upper nodes significantly by an exponential function. For
a subject s, the normalized value Scd(s) of semantic coverage degree is given by the following formula:

Scd(s) = 1  eScd(s)
1 + eScd(s)

(7)

Analogously, when a user pays more attention to a subject with
ample semantic coverage ability, one would have a strong semantics understanding ability to the subject. Based on the subjects the
user is interested in, the semantic interest degree of s for user u can
be calculated as Eq. (8):


mMC

mMC

Sidu(s) =


siS

Scd(s)  (s, m)
Scd(si)  (si, m)

(8)

4.2.2. Personal UP

In this subsection, we infer a users personal interest based on
the content interest degree and semantic interest degree of a sub-
ject. The personal interest degree is derived by combining the roles
of two factors as shown in Eq. (9):

Iu(s) = 2  Cidu(s)  Sidu(s)
Cidu(s) + Sidu(s)

(9)

From Eq. (9), we can see that the target user only has reposted
more number of micro-blogs for a specific subject, and the greater
semantic coverage degree of the subject is, the more the user is
interested in the subject.

Based on this idea, we can construct personal UP including the

semantics by the following definition.

Definition 3. Let u be a target user, personal UP can be determined
by two-tuples u = (Su, Iu). Su  S is the set of subjects. Iu is a real
number set. s  Su,Iu(s)  Iu, Iu(s) > 0.

Personal UP is formed by a group of subjects that the target
user is interested in and their corresponding interest degree of the
subjects.

4.3. Personal EUP based on semantics

In the micro-blog scenario, personal interesting subjects of a
user are quite few due to the limitations of the micro-blog short
text. However, we can discover a users supplementary interests
by vertical semantics expansion in the ontology structure, which
is called as personal EUP.

Here, we have an assumption that when a user is interested in
a subject s, one should acquire tastes from all child subjects of s in
terms of the ontology category structure. Therefore, according to
the target users existing interesting subjects, semantically related
to subjects of personal UP could be added into Su in order to
generate the expanded subject set ESu and expanded interest
degree set EIu.

Algorithm 2 describes the interest expansion of the personal UP.
As a new subject is added, the interest degree of the subject
is also updated. Algorithm 2 shows specific interest expansion
and interest degree update methods. Obviously, in steps 3 and 4,
the extensible subject nodes are selected with time complexity of
O(nlogn). In step 11, this algorithm shows us how to assign the interest degree of objects and add them into the original interest set.
As an example, Fig. 3 shows the change process from personal UP
to EUP. In Fig. 3, the green objects are ordinary subjects while the
pink objects are interesting subjects for user u. We select black objects as the candidate set for available expanding subjects. This allows us to select their red child nodes in order to expand probable
interesting subjects, which are added into personal UP forming as
the EUP. Additionally, the interest degree of red nodes inherits that
of their ancestor nodes because it is reasonable that the user is very
interested in the added nodes as well as their parent nodes.

J. Zheng et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 34 (2015) 1326

Fig. 3. Personal EUP construction based on semantics expansion.

Algorithm 2 Semantic interest expansion.
Input:

ontology  = (S, R, A), personal UP u = (Su, Iu), initial set
S0 = .
Eu = (ESu, EIu) applied to ontology structure.

Output:
1: set S0 = Su, ESu = Su, EIu = Iu;
2: for each s  S0 do
3: while there exists s0  S0, it holds that s    s0 do
S0 = S0  {s0};
end while

4:
5:
6: end for
7: for each s  S0, get the children node set Cs of s do

if (Cs == ) then
return;
end if
for each s  CS do
compute interest degree of expanded subject EIu(s) =
Iu(s);
expand subject set ESu = ESu  {s};
expand interest degree set EIu = EIu  EIu(s);
end for

8:
9:
10:
11:
12:

13:
14:
15:
16: end for

5. Interest extraction based on NUP

In this section, we present a novel approach to discover neighborhood of the target user, and the NUP is modeled by integrating
neighbor EUPs into a personal EUP. Afterwards, characteristics of
NUP are analyzed.

5.1. RPR & FPR

In micro-blog platforms, UP ought to not only consider individual micro-blogs but also pay attention to behaviors from followee friends, which could enhance personal interest globally. In
this subsection, we adopt resource relationship and follow relationship between users to discover the neighborhood of a user for
expanding users interests. In order to compute the neighborhood
interest, we give preliminary definitions about neighborhood.

Definition 4. Let u be a target user. Mu represents the set of all the
micro-blogs that u reposts.

Definition 5. Let ui, uj be two users. Mui and Muj correspond to
micro-blog set of ui and uj, respectively. The RPR from ui to uj can
be defined:

where sim(mi, mj) is the similarity between mi and mj. |Mui| and
|Muj| are cardinal number of micro-blog set Mui and Muj, respec-
tively.

Followees are the best direct way to reflect useful interests of a
user. In the micro-blog scenario, follow actions can depict perception relationship between users, which are formalized as follows.

Definition 6. Let u be a target user, friend set followed by u is
denoted as Fu = {uj|u f uj}.
Definition 7. Let ui, uj be two users. Followee friend sets are Fui
and Fuj, respectively. The FPR from ui to uj can be calculated by
Eq. (11):

ij =   f (ui, uj) + (1   )  |Fui  Fuj|
Rf
|Fui|
(11)
where |Fui| and |Fuj| are cardinal number of followee friend set
Fui and Fuj, respectively. f (ui, uj) represents the function of follow
relationship from ui to uj, and f (ui, uj) = 1, if ui
f uj; otherwise
f (ui, uj) = 0.
In this case, due to differences of mutual follow relationships
between users, the perception degree Rf
ji, which
is a kind of new cognitive relationship in social networks. As we
know, if a user has followed another user, one would accept potential and latent preference from the interested individual eas-
ily. When they follow each other mutually and have not common
friends, their perception relationship can be viewed as 1. Here, we
only consider directed follow perception relationship, we set the
weight parameter  = 0.5 harmoniously to adjust the follow action weight from ui to uj.

ij is different from Rf

Also, the increasing of  can produce heavier weight for the
follow action between users, which makes follow perception relationship increase easier. Hence, plenty of close friends can be selected for interest expanding.

Based on closeness relationships in follow action and resource
content, the comprehensive perception degree from ui to uj can be
calculated by Eq. (12):
ij + (1  )Rr
Rij = Rf
ij.

(12)
By using above perception relationship, neighborhood of a target user can be selected by predefined threshold , defined as be-
low.
Definition 8. Let ui be a target user. Given uj, the perception
relationship from ui to uj is Rij. The neighborhood set of ui can be
defined as Nui = {uj|Rij  }.


miMui


mjMuj
|Mui||Muj|

ij =
Rr

sim(mi, mj)

(10)

The value of  is used to weigh the relative importance between follow perception relationship and resource perception
relationship in the process of selecting neighboring friends. There-

fore, the variation of the parameter  would determine which perception relationship has greater influence in affecting the selection
of neighborhood. Especially, when the value of  is increasing, the
users followed tightly by the target user are selected; instead, the
users close to the target user by the resource are chose with a lower
value of .

Note that for the desired interest of the target user, these neighbor users can reveal inevitable interesting subjects. Hence, we can
extend personal EUP to NUP by taking neighbor interests into con-
sideration.

5.2. NUP modeling

We design an interest extension method that extracts latent interesting subjects of a target user u from the users in neighborhood
Nu, named as NUP. First, we define the NUP of u as below.

Definition 9. Let u be a target user. NUP of u can be defined as twotuples Nu = (NSu, NIu). NSu  S is the set of subjects. NIu is a real
number set. s  NSu,NIu(s)  NIu, NIu(s) > 0.

According to neighborhood set Nu, personal EUP for each user
in Nu is modeled. Based on EUPs from Nu, some novel subjects
for target user u are supplemental by the semantic relevance.
Meanwhile, the interest degree of extended subject is updated
with neighbor interest. Generally, interest selection mechanism of
the herd effect can make users follow the interest degree by the will
of the majority, and a leader has a strong control ability of interest.
That is, the closer perception relationship between the target user
and others is, the greater the impact on decision making is.
Definition 10. Let ui be a target user. Eui = (ESui
(NSui
, NIui
interest degree of subject s can be defined as:
if s  ESui,

), Nui =
) correspond to personal EUP and NUP. s  NSui, the


, EIui

(s) =

NIui

ujNui (s)

Rij  EIuj

Rij

(s)

ujNui (s)

(13)

(14)

if s  ESui,

(s) =

NIui


(s)

EIui

if 0 <

max

(s),

EIui

ui

(s)|
|N

(s)| < 0.5
|Nui
Rij  EIuj

ujN
(s)
ui

Rij

(s)

 else.

(s)

Where Nui

(s), EIu(s) > EIui

(s) = {u|u  Nui

(s) = {u|u  Nui

ujN
ui
, EIu(s) > 0} is the set of users in Nui
(s)}
interested in subject s; N
ui
is the set of users from neighborhood, which are more interested
in subject s than target user. As one can see from Eqs. (13) and
(14), neighborhood interest evaluates the interest effect of neighborhood for target user about a new subject in terms of collaborative wisdom; additionally, for an older subject, the attitude of
target user is dominated by that of most of users in neighborhood.
If more than half of users in neighborhood like subjects more than
the target user, one may update the interest degree by neighbor
collaborative strategy; otherwise, the target user insists on ones
opinion. Based on the above strategy, Algorithm 3 gives an interest
extension of personal EUP in terms of Nu.

In Algorithm 3, the neighbor interest subjects from each
user in neighborhood are selected by steps 35. In steps 810,
the extensible subjects are filtered with the comparison against

Algorithm 3 Neighborhood interest expansion.
Input:

ontology  = (S, R, A), personal EUP Eu = (ESu, EIu),
neighborhood set Nu, initial set S0 = .
Nu = (NSu, NIu) applied to ontology structure.

Output:
1: set S0 = ESu, NSu = ESu, NIu = EIu;
2: for each uj  Nu do

for each s  ESuj do
combine neighbor interest NSu = NSu  {s};
end for

3:
4:
5:
6: end for
7: for each s  NSu do
8: while there exists s  S0, it holds that s    s do

filter semantically related interest S0 = S0  {s};
end while

9:
10:
11: end for
12: generate neighbor subject set NSu = S0;
13: for each s  NSu do

compute neighborhood interest degree NIu(s) by definition
10;
generate neighborhood interest degree set NIu = NIu 
NIu(s);
16: end for

15:

14:

personal EUP. By the neighbor effects, the expanded subjects
increase semantic focus and specificity of subjects in ESu as much
as possible. If a user in Nu is more specific interested in subject s
than target user u, the corresponding children subjects of s should
be merged for u, and the interest degree is assigned in terms of
collaborative wisdom among users in neighborhood. The algorithm
also belongs to the one with the time computational complexity of
polynomial time. To illustrate the detailed steps of interest fusion,
Fig. 4 shows the process of NUP construction. EUP1 and EUPn are
extended UPs for users in Nu. The pink objects are their interesting
subjects, which are supplied for EUPs expansion. Comparing
against target users subjects in EUP, the black objects are selected
from neighbor EUP1 and EUPn for more semantic specificity. The
crimson objects represent the subjects updated by most of users in
neighborhood. Combining the origin EUP of u, the NUP is modeled.
As we expected, setting the value of , neighborhood relying on
follow perception relationship is different from that of resource
perception relationship. When the value of  is small, the neighborhood are dominated by resource perception relationship, which
can supply redundant subjects. Otherwise, the neighborhood are
dominated by follow perception relationship, which cannot provide sufficient interest to supplement.

Also, the number of neighborhood users may affect target users
interest supplement. When the value of  is small, the fewer neighborhood users cannot supply enough subjects to add users inter-
est; meanwhile, diverse uncorrelated subjects are added to user if
too many neighborhood users expand various interests.

5.3. Analysis of NUP

The NUP refers to the interesting subjects deriving from neighbor collective effects. Actually, the number of subjects in NUP is
more than that of personal EUP and UP; simultaneously, the range
of interest is wider than that of personal EUP and UP, which increases the selective chance of recommendation.

According to Algorithms 2 and 3, we reach the following
conclusions.
Property 1. Let u be a target user. u = (Su, Iu), Eu = (ESu, EIu),
Nu = (NSu, NIu) correspond to personal UP, EUP and NUP. We have
Su  ESu  NSu. s  NSu, we also have NIu(s)  EIu(s)  Iu(s).

J. Zheng et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 34 (2015) 1326

Fig. 4. NUP construction based on neighborhood.

This property states that neighborhood can increase users

, Iui
), respectively. If Sui  Suj, we have ESui  ESuj.

) correspond to personal EUPs for ui = (Sui
, Iuj

absolute interest in a certain subject.
Property 2. Let ui, uj be two users. Eui = (ESui
(ESuj
, EIuj
uj = (Suj
Property 3. Let ui, uj be two users. Nui and Nuj are neighborhood sets
of ui and uj. Nui = (NSui
) and Nuj = (NSuj
) correspond
to NUPs for Eui = (ESui
) and Euj = (ESuj
), respectively.
If ESui  ESuj and Nui  Nuj, we have NSui  NSuj.

) and Euj =
) and

, NIuj
, EIuj

, NIui
, EIui

, EIui

Property 3 describes a user with more neighbor followee friends
will have stronger potential interest probability for other subjects.
In addition, the proposed NUP could enhance the interest range of
a user against CF method and personal UP. For example, Table 1
gives a useful comparison of NUP and other methods.
Example data (Table 1).

Example 1. An example of interesting subjects of NUP is given by
Table 1.
This is a personal UP system of{u1, u2, u3, u4}. Here,{u2, u3, u4}
is followee friends set of u1. For u1, we cannot discover new
interesting subject set {s4, s5} from historical set {s1, s2, s3}.
Therefore, the interest degree of {s4, s5} for u1 based on UP is
represented as asterisks.
In addition, from the interest observations of {u2, u3, u4} on
{s1, s2, s3}, only u4 can be used to predict the interest of {s4, s5}
according to the historical contents. Based on the collaborative
(s5) = 0.5
idea, the interest degree of s5 can be supplied with Iu1

= 0.13. The interest degree of s4 is still not
(0.640.26)2+(00.5)2
assigned.
However, considering the idea of NUP, suppose that  = 0.5
and Fu1  Fu2 = , so there is R12 = Rf
12 =
0.5  0.5 + 0.5  0 = 0.25. Similarly, R13 = 0.25; R14 = 0.5 
0.5 + 0.5  0.2650 = 0.38. By setting  = 0.2, we can find Nu1 =
{u2, u3, u4}, so the interest degree of extended subjects Iu1
(s4) =
= 0.53.
0.25(0.44+0.45)

(s5) = 0.250.58+0.380.50

12 + (1  )Rr

= 0.45, Iu1

0.25+0.38

0.25+0.25

6. Application and experiment evaluation

In this section, we present some recommendation applications
using the proposed NUP, and evaluate the performance of the
NUP by comparing with personal UP and CF recommendations.
Simultaneously, we share some insights from our observations and
analysis of the NUP-based subject recommendation.

6.1. Recommendation strategy

Using the NUP, top k subjects are selected to reflect the target
users future interest trend. Furthermore, we can recommend
micro-blogs related to subjects for the target user. Particularly,
the relevance of micro-blogs with the subject leverages traditional
machine learning methods to classify the categories of micro-
blogs, which is not investigated elaborately here.

In addition, the similarity between personal UPs considering
content is computed to discover the most similar top k users for
CF mechanism, as shown in Eq. (15):
sim(ui, uk)

(Iui

(s)  Iu)(Iuk

(s)  Iu)2 

sSuiSuk
(Iui

(s)  Iu)

sSuiSuk

sSuiSuk

(s)  Iu)2

(Iuk

(15)


where Sui Suk is the set of subject both interested in by user ui, uk;
Iu(s), Iu are the personal interest degree for subject s and average
interest degree of user u in personal UP, respectively.

Based on similarity between users, the interest degree of subject

s by the CF method is shown in Eq. (16):


ukNui

Iuk


(s)  sim(ui, uk)
|sim(ui, uk)|

ukNui

(s) =

Cfidui

(16)

The top k subjects have been selected for target user to recom-

mend relevant micro-blogs.

Table 1
The interests of NUP against UP and CF methods for user u1.

s1

s2

s3

u1
u2
u3
u4

s4

s4

s4

s5

s5

s5

Table 2
Statistics showing the number of users, followees, users micro-blogs, followees
micro-blogs, test micro-blogs in each dataset.

Users
Followees
Users micro-blogs
Followees micro-blogs
Test micro-blogs

Nlpir

Application 1

Application 2

6.2. Evaluation of recommending subjects

In this section, the effectiveness of NUP is interpreted by comparing the differences against the personal UP and CF recom-
mendation. As is explained, the personal UP involves interesting
subjects based on the content without taking into account seman-
tics.

6.2.1. Data description and experiment design

In our experiment, we use Nlpir dataset and two Application
datasets to create UPs involved in four domains. The Nlpir dataset
is from Nlpir website (http://www.nlpir.org/), which is from Sina
platform. The dataset was selected during a period from 4th of Dec.
2011 to 23rd of Dec. 2011, and 85 users and 1247 followee friends
were used elaborately for NUP construction. For the Nlpir dataset,
each user has more than 10 followees and 30 micro-blogs. In
Application dataset 1, there are 4386 users in our database to crawl
Sina micro-blog platform (http://open.weibo.com) for the newest
micro-blogs, attended friends, mutual responses and interactions
from the 10th of Apr. 2013 to the 29th of Apr. 2013. In order to
get pure content information for NUPs, we only selected the primitive users including 75 test users and 4013 followee friends for
our experiments and recommendation generation. For this dataset,
each user has more than 50 followees and a few micro-blogs while
their followees have large numbers of micro-blogs to supplement
interest. In Application dataset 2, 10 thousand users are used to collect their reposting micro-blogs and their follow relationships from
the 10th of Oct. 2013 to the 24th of Oct. 2013 in terms of Tencent
Weibo platform. We select 338 users, 5467 followee friends and
their 0.2 million micro-blogs to build neighborhood user profile.
Each user has at least 30 followees and 40 micro-blogs to discover
ones neighborhood friends. Statistics for all datasets are listed in
Table 2. For all the datasets, we split users micro-blogs set into two
parts according to the time period, the earlier period was used for
modeling user profile and latter period was used for testing.

In our research, Wikipedia was used to help understand categories structure of subjects (http://zh.wikipedia.org). Moreover,
domain categories on four topics were utilized to discover the
fundamental semantic coverage degree of the subjects, including sports, economics, culture, and IT. In the process of semantics
transferring via categories information, we set coefficient  = 1.2
to simulate the variation trend of semantic specificity of the sub-
jects.

In order to evaluate the performance of our proposed recommendation mechanism, we used these performance evaluation

metrics: precision and recall [22]. These metrics have been defined
as follows:

Precision = |ST  SR|
|SR|
Recall = |ST  SR|
|ST|
(18)
where ST = {s|I(s) > 0} is the actual subject set where test microblogs involved and SR is the recommendation subject set relying on
the NUP, personal UP or CF method for each user.

(17)

6.2.2. Results and evaluation

This section presents the experimental recommendation results of several recommendation approaches. We conducted experiments and computed the precision and recall by varying the
value of subject recommendation list size k from 4 to 12 with an
increment of 2 for the first two datasets while the last one adopts
the recommendation list size k from 4 to 20 with an increment of
4. As is known, the parameters  and  will make a great influence
on the performance of NUP. Figs. 57 (left) present precision results
for all the datasets. From the figures, it is understood that there is
a clear benefit for the NUP subject recommendation strategy than
the CF and UP approaches. For example, in the case of Nlpir dataset
with the recommendation list of size 4, we can see that the NUP approach enjoys a precision score of approximately 0.51, indicating
that, on average, more than 170 of 340 recommended subjects by
NUP are likely received by 85 users. However, for CF and personal
UP methods, the precision values are 0.46 and 0.43, respectively.
This represents that the subjects focused by most of followees is
prone to be accepted by target user in the micro-blog scenario. The
neighborhood can contain implicit interest of target user and make
a prominent role in aspect of interest acquiring of target user. Ad-
ditionally, Figs. 57 (left) shows that the precision results based on
the personal UP and CF approaches are becoming gradually close
when the list size is greater than 10. However, the precision values are still lower than that of NUP. As is known, in the micro-blog
scenario, the similarity of users is small due to the shortage and
impurity of text messages, and the performance of the CF method
is certainly poor. Considering the FPR, the semantic relevant subjects from neighborhood are also recommended to the target user
although micro-blog their contents are not consistent. Therefore,
the precision of NUP outperforms those of other methods.

The recall results by three kinds of recommendation approaches
are shown in Figs. 57 (right). Obviously, for all datasets, our NUP
approach achieves a better performance than CF and UP while
a small number of subjects is selected. Hence, there are enough
subjects to match users preferences in order to achieve high recall.
For example, Fig. 7 shows significant recall performance which
states that the expansion of the subjects. This is likely due to the
results of comprehensiveness of neighborhood recommendation.
Enough followees and supplement micro-blog content can supply
adequate interests for the target user. However, for Nlpir dataset,
the recall of NUP is more and more close to that of the CF method
with the increasing recommendation list size. This is because
the number of followee users in this dataset is relatively small,
and the follow relationship between users is weak. The number
of semantic relevant subjects expanded by NUP is small, which
supply limited interesting subjects while most of recommended
subjects are impure as k rises.

As mentioned in the above section, the value of parameter 
can affect the perception relationship between users, which makes
the neighborhood of a user varying so as to form different NUPs.
Figs. 810 show the precision and recall results at different k values for different  values with  = 0.1,  = 0.3,  = 0.5 for

J. Zheng et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 34 (2015) 1326

Fig. 5. Nlpir dataset: precision and recall based on NUP, CF, and UP recommendation approaches under different k for 85 users ( = 0.5,  = 0.1).

Fig. 6. Application dataset 1: precision and recall based on NUP, CF, and UP recommendation approaches under different k for 75 users ( = 0.5,  = 0.3).

Fig. 7. Application dataset 2: precision and recall based on NUP, CF, and UP recommendation approaches under different k for 338 users ( = 0.5,  = 0.5).

Nlpir, Application 1 and Application 2 datasets, respectively. Obvi-
ously, it can be seen that the same prominent changes happen at
 = 0.5 with precision first increasing and then decreasing for different recommendation lists. Interestingly, in all datasets, the recall is maximized at  = 0.5 for most of result-lists of size, which
describes that both considering the roles of follow perception relationship and resource perception relationship equivalently are

beneficial for neighborhood selecting and NUP construction. Comparing Fig. 9 against Figs. 810, we find users with less reposting
micro-blogs and more followees are likely to receive neighbor interest subjects. Specially, the curves change dramatically with parameter  varying from 0.3 to 0.5 for Application 1 dataset, which
indicates that the roles of FPR and RPR change strongly in the process of NUP construction. We see that there is no prominent rising

Fig. 8. Nlpir dataset: precision and recall based on NUP recommendation under different  with different values of k ( = 0.1).

Fig. 9. Application dataset 1: precision and recall based on NUP recommendation under different  with different values of k ( = 0.3).

Fig. 10. Application dataset 2: precision and recall based on NUP recommendation under different  with different values of k ( = 0.5).

trend for the precision and recall when the value of  exceeds 0.5,
implying that the role of FPR is dominated in the neighborhood se-
lecting.

In addition, from Figs. 810, we can see that the precision and
recall under other values of  are both relatively worse than that of
 = 0.5. Therefore, we can predict that the best balance of precision and recall is achieved at  = 0.5 for most of recommendation
lists. This is because FPR is dominant in the process of neighborhood selecting when   0.5, which leads to the fact that subjects
recommended are too irrelevant. Contrarily, thoroughly considering RPR makes the number of neighborhood decrease because dif-

ferences of the resource content give rise to a low similarity between users when  < 0.5.

In Figs. 1113, we compare the precision and recall results of
NUP under different  with different values of k for three datasets.
It can be seen that the best performance is achieved with  =
0.1,  = 0.3 and  = 0.5, respectively. For example, the precision
increases first and then decreases with the value of  changing in
Nlpir dataset, which reaches the maximal at  = 0.1, presenting
0.51, 0.39, 0.32, 0.28, 0.24 for list size 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, respectively.
Interestingly, the precision values are also maximal as 0.41, 0.31,
0.25, 0.21 and 0.19 for list size 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 at  = 0.3 in Application

J. Zheng et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 34 (2015) 1326

Fig. 11. Nlpir dataset: precision and recall based on NUP recommendation under different  with different values of k ( = 0.5).

Fig. 12. Application dataset 1: precision and recall based on NUP recommendation under different  with different values of k ( = 0.5).

Fig. 13. Application dataset 2: precision and recall based on NUP recommendation under different  with different values of k ( = 0.5).

dataset 1. Also, the precision values present as 0.41, 0.26, 0.20, 0.16
and 0.13 for list size 4, 8, 12, 16, 20 at  = 0.5 in Application dataset
2. As we can observe, the mean number of neighborhood is small
when the parameter  has a relatively large value, and the number
of subjects recommended is also few. Additionally, when the value
of  is too low, the mean number of neighborhood is big enough to
supply abundant subjects so as to reduce the purity of recommendation performance. However, we note that a lot of follow relationships exist in Application dataset 1 and the perception relationship
degree between users is large. Therefore, we set a larger parameter
 = 0.3 to maintain the relatively stable number of neighborhood

users to build NUP. In Application dataset 2, as selected users have
a lot of followees and many reposting micro-blogs, the perception
relationship between users is large enough to discover ones neigh-
borhood, which leads to a gentle curve for the variation of performance in Fig. 13.

6.2.3. Analysis of interest extension

To analyze the expansion of interest subject, we adopt the
AUC [51] metric (ROC) to verify the effectiveness of our method. For
all users, their mean AUC value states that the average percent of
non-relevant subjects of recommendation methods. Table 3 shows

Table 3
Mean AUC of NUP, CF and UP methods for 338 users.

Precision

Percent of non-relevant subjects

Table 4
Precision and recall under different numbers of followee friends for Application
dataset.

Precision
Recall

The number of followee friends
(010)
(1020)

(2030)

Table 5
Precision under different numbers of UP, micro-blogs, test micro-blogs for
Application dataset.

[00.3)
[0.30.6)
[0.61]

No. of UP

No. of micro-blogs

No. of test micro-blogs

the mean AUC of NUP, CF and UP methods for Application dataset 2.
In Table 3, we can see that the NUP method recommend less nonrelevant subjects than other methods.

As described above, the recommendation performance of the
proposed NUP is affected by the features of a user, including the
social activity and interaction ability of a user. As is expected, when
the number of friends for NUP is few, there are not enough appropriate subjects to help the target user obtain the desired information in order to improve the precision. However, large numbers of
followee friends can present abundant subjects to precipitate the
user lost the most popular topics and lower the recommendation
performance. Table 4 shows the precision and recall statistics with
different numbers of followee friends in Application dataset 1. In
Table 4, the results show that most of users are prone to receiving
their followees information to obtain favorite subjects when the
number of their followees lingers about 1020.

Generally, if a user reposts micro-blogs frequently, one can
get enough information without needing neighbor helps. In con-
trary, an isolated or silent user would prefer obtaining relevant
information from neighbor friends. Table 5 shows variations of precision range under different number of UP, micro-blogs, test microblogs for 75 users in Application dataset 1. The precision intervals
are divided in three range types [00.3),[0.3, 0.6),[0.6, 1]. From
Table 5, we analyzed the differences of users under different precision ranges, and attempted to find which kind of users is fit for
the NUP approach. As we can see, the numbers of users are 35, 24
and 16 under precision range [00.3),[0.3, 0.6) and [0.6, 1], re-
spectively. Simultaneously, the number of micro-blogs for the NUP
is gradually smaller with the precision increasing. For these users,
neighborhood plays an important role in the process of interest ac-
quiring. Hence, in Table 5, there is a basic phenomenon for NUPs
that users have less micro-blogs in personal Ups generate better
recommendation results with a high precision, which is consistent
with what we expected.

To examine the variations of the number of users based on
the NUP and personal UP in different subjects, we performed an
experiment to construct the NUPs at  = 0.5,  = 0.3. Fig. 14
shows distribution of the number of users in four subjects based
on the NUP and personal UP, respectively. The results show that
the number of users interested in different subjects is prominently
changing. In general, the most interesting topics for the great
majority of NUPs imply that the subjects gradually become popular
in the propagation of social interest. For each user, that personal

Fig. 14. Number of users about NUP and UP on different subjects for 75 users with
 = 0.5,  = 0.3.

UP reveals that the existing partial individual interest. Actually,
expanded subjects by neighborhood can be used to spread friends
interest to the target user, which has made the number of users
interested in the subject larger and larger. In Fig. 14, the number
of NUPs increases markedly comparing with that of the origin
personal UP in each subject. For example, the number of users in
IT and Culture rises up by 22 and 20, respectively. The ideal result
is that all the users are interested in the extended subjects, which
can be revealed by the effects of group interest. An application of
this insight is to maximize the profit in micro-blog advertisements.

7. Conclusions

This paper investigates how neighborhood of a user can be used
to help build a novel NUP in the micro-blog scenario by addressing the drawbacks of existing UP approaches immersing in use of
personal knowledge. First, personal UP is constructed based on integrating the content interest and semantic interest, and then the
improved EUP is created. Second, taking into account the roles of
RPR and FPR, neighborhood of a user is discovered. Lastly, we propose a NUP modeling approach based on neighbor interest and personal EUP.

In our experiments, the proposed NUP approach outperforms
the personal UP and CF method, both in recommendation accuracy and coverage. We contribute to utilizing collective neighborhood information to mine personal potential interest to enhance
the quality of recommending micro-blog subjects. In addition, the
evaluation results show that FPR and RPR are both equally important for NUP construction, and the users rarely reposting microblog are fit for neighborhood helps. Interestingly, the threshold 
can determine the number of neighborhood users. Especially when
the value of  is 1, our NUP becomes the traditional personal UP.

As a short text form, micro-blogs from friends could be viewed
as an important channel for mining social interest. However,
linkages of users are various. Especially, social links based on users
action is multidimensional. In the future work, we plan to utilize
our approach to discover the potential multidimensional interest
community for cross-domain recommendation. In addition, the
optimal number of neighborhood friends is necessary to research
so as to reduce the time complexity of neighborhood selecting and
decrease the repeatability of relevant interest. Hence, further study
is required to investigate these effective approaches for improving
diverse recommendation performance in the micro-blog scenario.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank all of the anonymous reviewers for
their insightful and constructive comments and useful suggestions

J. Zheng et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 34 (2015) 1326

that have significantly improved the quality of the manuscript.
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Nos. 61303096, 61103067), and the Natural
Science Foundation of Shanghai (13ZR1454600).
