Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 12

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial
Special Issue of the Journal of Web Semantics on Geospatial Semantics

Geospatial reasoning has grown larger scope in the semantic
web. Increasingly more information is geolocated, more mobile devices produce geocoded records, and more web mashups are created to convey geospatial information. Semantics can support the
integration of geospatial information, track the provenance and
quality of the data shown to an end user, and improve visualizations and querying of geospatial data. This special issue highlights
recent trends in research and practice in geospatial semantics.

The availability of geospatial data in semantic web formats is constantly increasing. Examples include geonames.org,
with geographical
information of all countries in many lan-
guages, linkedgeodata.org, which offers OpenStreetMap data in
RDF queried through SPARQL, data.ordnancesurvey.co.uk, which
publishes all kinds of products from the UKs mapping agency, and
geo.linkeddata.es, which contains data from Spain in RDF.

A diversity of standards have emerged in this area, including
GeoSPARQL, GeoJSON, GML, and KML to name a few, in addition
to other popular ISO standards that are used in Geographic
Information Systems (GIS). Their merits and level of adoption
vary, as the community puts them to the test in a wide range of
application types and scales.

The research community in this area is very diverse and well
beyond semantic web researchers. Within computer science, it includes researchers in spatio-temporal databases, computational
geometry, machine learning, and crowdsourcing of spatial infor-
mation. Beyond computer science, it includes geographers, cartog-
raphers, and social scientists. There is strong interest in the commercial world and from governments, as well as in scientific research and social applications of geospatial data. This paints a very
heterogeneous landscape of requirements and priorities, all centered around space and, inevitably, time.

This special issue includes four papers with contributions in

both research and practice in the area of geospatial semantics.

Harbelot, Arenas, and Cruz present a model to track the
evolution of geospatial entities over time, and apply it to track
changes in land use and land cover in a region. They introduce the
LC3 model, which uses GeoSPARQL and a model of time based on
Allens classic temporal calculus. Here, semantic web technologies
enable the system to reason about the geospatial information for
two purposes. One purpose is to check the consistency of the
observations and validate the geospatial information coming into
the system. A second purpose is to make inferences to generate
new knowledge from those observations. Their approach is used
with satellite images of the European landscape, and identify
for example when an area evolves from a coniferous forest to
become urban fabric and eventually industrial units. A taxonomy
of land use and land cover types enables the detection of temporal

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.11.002
1570-8268/
 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V.

patterns from the data. This enables policy makers to understand
the impacts of constructing a highway or an industrial complex.
One of the open research challenges is handling negligible changes
and uncertainty.

Keler and Farmer build on Hagerstrands time geography
framework, developed by to analyze human activities that span
time and space. In particular, they take the idea of spacetime
paths (an individuals location change over time) and spacetime
prisms (an individuals potential path area over time) to capture
how individual constraints (home and work locations or speed
of travel) affect the extent of those prisms. They create an
ontology design pattern to describe a spacetime prism, using
Hobbs and Pans Time Ontology and Janowiczs Points of Interest
ontology design pattern. They use semantics to answer queries that
require making inferences about the spatio-temporal dimensions
of prisms. They use this approach in two different applications.
One is gathering data from cars, such as fuel consumption and CO2
emissions, to generate environmental information. Looking at the
spacetime prisms of increased emissions, the small ones indicate
spatial effects, where emissions may be due to steep terrain, and
larger ones indicate other effects such as speeding or driving style.
The second application uses cultural heritage data, in particular
to identify photos about a specific historical event and how the
effects spread from a specific location to a geographic area of a
certain diameter. A promising area of future work is extending this
framework with other concepts from time geography.

Nikolau, Dogani, Bereta, Garbis, Karpathiotakis, Kyzirakos, and
Koubarakis present an approach to visualize the evolution of spatial information in linked data. Their implemented system, called
Sextant, generates such visualizations and allows collaborative
editing to enrich the information and create special-purpose maps.
Sextant incorporates several standards and translators, so spatial
information can be specified in KML or GeoJSON, and temporal information can be specified in several formats. It includes a map ontology that is used to describe map products that are integrated
and queryable under the framework. Sextant includes a variety of
mapping products and geospatial datasets, which are available as
linked data, and has been used in a variety of scenarios, including
emergency response and monitoring of environmental data.

Patroumpas, Georgomanolis, Stratiotis, Alexakis, and Athanasiou take the INSPIRE directive in the European Union to make
geospatial data available in a common format, and proposes an approach to make INSPIRE data available in semantic web format.
The approach is to extend existing INSPIRE infrastructure to expose data as linked data and support queries through GeoSPARQL.
The paper describes best practices for mapping metadata and data

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 12

to RDF and for assigning unique identifiers, and discusses performance and scalability issues in this enterprise.

Several recent workshops have emphasized the key role of
semantics in the geospatial arena. Of particular note are workshops
organized by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and the
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) focused on standardization
efforts in geospatial semantics,
leading to a joint W3C/OGC
Working Group to identify best practices and establish standards
where desirable. This would propel this research area by making

more open geospatial data available in common formats, enabling
easily reusable geospatial infrastructure and tools, and motivating
new approaches to geospatial data integration and exploitation.

Yolanda Gil
University of Southern California, United States

Raphael Troncy
