Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 33 (2015) 12

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial
Special issue of the Journal of Web Semantics on ontology-based
data access

The competitiveness of many enterprises today relies on exploiting the wealth of information that is available in various
distributed data sources or services. Thus, the problem of integrating data coming from many distributed and heterogeneous
data sources has been a hot research topic for many years, and
has received the attention of researchers in Databases, Knowledge
Representation, and the Semantic Web. Furthermore, the recent
utilization of big data in the private sector, government, and science has not only reinforced the importance of this topic but added
the challenge of scaling to huge datasets.

The ontology-based data access (OBDA) paradigm was formulated a few years ago to tackle the problem of data integration, and
more generally that of accessing data sources with a complex struc-
ture. The OBDA approach is based on three components: the data
layer, the conceptual model of the application that is used for expressing user requests, and the mapping between the two. The data
layer might consist of a single, possibly federated, database, or by a
collection of possibly distributed and heterogeneous data sources
(this case is also known as ontology-based data integration). The
conceptual model is represented by an ontology, typically formalized in an appropriate description logic, and user requests are expressed as queries over the ontology. The mapping between the
conceptual model and the data sources is formalized by mapping
assertions, which are based on an appropriate logical language, but
which may also incorporate extra-logical features for data manip-
ulation. The aim of an OBDA system is to answer user queries by
transforming them into appropriate queries to the data layer, using the ontology and the mapping.

This special issue covers recent advances in the OBDA approach.
The call for papers resulted in 19 submissions that were carefully
reviewed by at least three reviewers. Seven papers were accepted
that offer a mix of OBDA theory and practice.

The paper Inconsistency-tolerant Query Answering in Ontologybased Data Access by Domenico Lembo, Maurizio Lenzerini, Riccardo Rosati, Marco Ruzzi, and Domenico Fabio Savo addresses
the problem of dealing with inconsistencies in OBDA. The general goal of the authors is both to study DL-based frameworks that
are inconsistency-tolerant, and to devise techniques for answering
unions of conjunctive queries under such inconsistency-tolerant
semantics. The work of the authors builds on approaches to consistent query answering in databases, which are based on the idea
of living with inconsistencies in the database, but trying to obtain only consistent information during query answering, by relying on the notion of database repair. The authors first adapt the

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.06.001
1570-8268/
 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

notion of database repair to the OBDA context, and show that, according to such a notion, inconsistency-tolerant query answering
is intractable, even for very simple DLs. Therefore, they propose a
different repair-based semantics, with the goal of reaching a good
compromise between the expressive power of the semantics and
the computational complexity of inconsistency-tolerant query an-
swering. Interestingly enough, they show that query answering
under the new semantics is first-order rewritable, even when the
ontology is expressed in one of the most expressive members of
the DL-Lite family of DLs.

The paper Optimising Resolution-Based Rewriting Algorithms for
OWL Ontologies by Despoina Trivela, Giorgos Stoilos, Alexandros
Chortaras, and Giorgos Stamou revisits and refines resolutionbased approaches to rewriting for the case of two description logics
strongly related to the OWL 2 profiles OWL 2 QL and OWL 2 EL.
The authors have implemented all algorithms they propose, and
have carried out an extensive experimental evaluation using many
well-known large and complex OWL ontologies. The experimental
results show that the authors own system, called Rapid, is in many
cases several orders of magnitude faster than existing systems, and
can compute rewritings within a few seconds.

The papers Temporalizing Rewritable Query Languages over
Knowledge Bases by Stefan Borgwardt, Marcel Lippmann and
Veronika Thost and Temporal Query Entailment in the Description Logic SHQ  by Franz Baader, Stefan Borgwardt, and Marcel
Lippmann are motivated by situation awareness applications i.e.,
detecting certain situations within a running system. To model
situation awareness and properties of dynamic systems, the authors investigate extensions of OBDA to the temporal case. In
the former paper, the authors propose a generic temporal query
language that combines the well-known propositional temporal
logic LTL with queries over ontologies. The authors show that, if
atemporal queries are rewritable, then the corresponding temporal
queries are also rewritable and they can be answered over a temporal database. In the latter paper, the authors consider as the query
language an extension of LTL where conjunctive queries can occur
in place of propositional variables, and as the ontology language
they use the expressive DL SHQ. For the resulting instance of temporalized OBDA, they investigate both data complexity and combined complexity of the query entailment problem. In the course
of this investigation, they also establish the complexity of consistency of Boolean knowledge bases in SHQ.

The paper Complexity of Answering Counting Aggregate Queries
over DL-Lite by Egor V. Kostylev and Juan L. Reutter studies the

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 33 (2015) 12

problem of answering queries using the aggregation operators
COUNT and COUNT DISTINCT in an OBDA setting. The authors
present an intuitive semantics for answering counting queries, together with a comparison with similar approaches from the area of
databases. In addition, it presents a detailed study of the computational complexity of evaluating counting queries conforming to
this semantics.

Although the theory of OBDA has progressed significantly over
the last few years, the engineering aspects of designing OBDA
systems have not been given corresponding attention, and there is
yet little experience derived from practical deployments of OBDA
components to support access to real-world data sets in daily
use. This is the motivation for the paper Engineering OntologyBased Access to Real-World Data Sources by Martin G. Skjveland,
Martin Giese, Dag Hovland, Espen H. Lian, and Arild Waaler. The
authors develop a declarative framework for describing the various
stages in the OBDA data engineering process. They apply that
framework in a proof of concept OBDA implementation using
real-world data sets from the Norwegian petroleum industry, and
sample queries supplied by professional end users. The datasets
used are in the form of relational databases and CSV files and the
translated datasets are encoded in RDF. They prototype two OBDA
architectures (materialized and virtual) and evaluate the pros and
cons of these using the sample data and queries.

Finally, the paper Efficient SPARQL-to-SQL with R2RML mappings by Mariano Rodriguez-Muro and Martin Rezk presents the
rewriting techniques utilized by the open source OBDA system
-ontop- (http://ontop.inf.unibz.it/). The authors develop a formal
approach for SPARQL-to-SQL translation that generates efficient
SQL by combining optimization techniques from logic programming and SQL optimization. The approach supports R2RML mappings over general relational schemas. The system -ontop- is
shown to outperform well-known SPARQL-to-SQL systems, as well
as commercial triple stores, by several orders of magnitude.

Diego Calvanese
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy
Manolis Koubarakis
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
E-mail address: koubarak@di.uoa.gr.

David Toman
University of Waterloo, Canada
Available online 6 June 2015

