Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 3 (2005) 34

Preface

Rule systems are generally considered to be a major
area in the further development of the Semantic Web.
On one hand, rules can specify declarative knowledge
in ontology languages, expressing constraints or trans-
formations, either in conjunction with, or as an alternative to, description logics. On the other hand, rules
can specify behavioural knowledge, enforcing policies
or reacting to events/changes.

This Special Issue attracted 12 submissions, of
which 4 were accepted after a careful, two-level reviewing process.

The papers collected here all study the combination
of rules with ontologies for the Semantic Web. While
the first paper evaluates practical aspects of such a combination with production rules, the other papers study
theoretical aspects of combining versions of Datalog
and description logics.

In Rules and Ontologies in Support of Real-time
Ubiquitous Application, Marek Hatala et al. evaluate the practical challenges and capabilities of combining ontologies and rules in the context of a realtime
ubiquitous application. A rule-based user model was
specifically designed to work in environments where
rich semantic descriptions are available. Retrieval criteria are represented as inference rules that combine
knowledge from psychoacoustics and cognitive domains with compositional aspects of interaction. The
evaluation concerns the laboratory and museum deployment testing together with the end user usability
evaluations.

In OWL Rules: A Proposal and Prototype Imple-
mentation, Ian Horrocks et al. present the Semantic
Web Rules Language (SWRL), which extends OWL
in a syntactically and semantically coherent manner.
SWRL rules are given formal meaning via an exten-

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2005.05.005

sion of the OWL DL model-theoretic semantics. The
authors discuss the expressive power of SWRL, showing that the ontology consistency problem is undecid-
able, provide several examples of SWRL usage, and
discuss a prototype implementation of reasoning support for SWRL.

In Query Answering for OWL-DL with Rules,
Boris Motik et al. argue that a combination of OWL-DL
and rules is desirable for the Semantic Web. While this
may easily lead to the undecidability of interesting reasoning problems, they present a decidable combination
with DL-safe rules: each variable in a rule is required to
occur in a non-DL-atom in the rule body. The authors
discuss the expressive power of such a combination and
present an algorithm for query answering in the related
logic SHIQ extended with DL-safe rules, based on a
reduction to disjunctive programs.


Finally, On the decidability and complexity of integrating ontologies and rules by Riccardo Rosati defines a formal framework of r-hybrid knowledge bases
(KBs) integrating ontologies and rules. These KBs are
parameterized by the logic used to specify the ontology,
and for the rules use Datalog
(with negation as failure and disjunction), where the rules interact with the
ontology according to a general safeness condition. The
paper shows that r-hybrid KBs capture many systems
proposed for combining rules and description logics. A
general algorithm is proved to preserve decidability of
reasoning when adding safe Datalog
rules to a KB,
and an analogous property holds for complexity. It is
proved that reasoning with OWL-DL as the ontology
parameter is decidable.


We are grateful to all submitters and reviewers for
their hard work leading to this Special Issue and to
various results found on the way.

Preface / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 3 (2005) 34

Grigoris Antoniou


Institute of Computer Science
FORTH, Vassilika Vouton
P.O. Box 1385, GR-711 10 Heraklion
Crete, Greece

Corresponding author. Tel.: +30 2810 391624
fax: +30 2810 391638
E-mail address: antoniou@ics.forth.gr
URL: http://ics.forth.gr/antoniou


Harold Boley 1
Faculty of Computer Science, UNB & Institute for
Information Technologye-Business
National Research Council of Canada
46 Dineen Drive, Fredericton, NB
E3B 9W4, Canada
1 Tel.: +1 506 444 0385; fax: +1 506 444 6114
E-mail address: harold.boley@nrc.gc.ca
