Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 3 (2005) 7778

Preface

This special issue of the Journal of Web Semantics contains revised and extended versions of some of
the best papers presented in the Research Track of the
Third International Conference on the Semantic Web
(ISWC 2004), which took place in Hiroshima, Japan
November 711, 2004. The conference was the most
successful of the ISWC conferences to date, attracting more than 400 attendees from all over the world.
This is a good indication that the Semantic Web has
been firmly established on the research agenda. The
research track received 205 submissions of which 48
were accepted for publication. The conference sessions were well attended and both the invited talks and
the paper presentations stirred stimulating discussions.
Overall, the conference and its related events reflected
the broad interest in the Semantic Web, and how active
the field is.

The papers collected in this special issue reflect the
diversity of Semantic Web research, with topics including complexity and decidability issues for RDFS and
OWL, ontology authoring tools, semantic annotation,
blogging on the Semantic Web, benchmarking OWL
knowledge bases and planning for web service compo-
sition. One of the papers in this special issue, LUBM:
a benchmark for OWL knowledge base systems by
Guo, Pan and Heflin was the winner of the conference
research track best paper award.

In Completeness, decidability and complexity of
entailment for RDF schema and an intentional variant
of OWL, Herman ter Horst provides completeness,
decidability and complexity results for entailment in
RDF schema using partial closure graphs. These graphs
 finite for finite RDFS graphs  are computable in
polynomial time and are proven to be sufficient for the
decidability of entailment. The results are extended to

RDFS enriched with datatypes and a subset of OWL.
Entailment is shown to be NP-complete with its complexity reducing to being in P in the case of graphs with
no blank nodes.

In OntoTrack: a semantic approach for ontology
authoring and explaining, Thorsten Liebig and Olaf
Noppens elaborate on the features and implementation
of OntoTrack, an ontology authoring tool combining
a graph-based hierarchical layout with instant feedback produced by reasoning on the consequences of
the modeled ontology. Features such as zooming on the
subsumption graph, context sensitivity, synchronization with an external reasoner and on-demand textual
explanation provide substantial support to ontology
designers in understanding the logical meaning and
consequences of their design decisions.

In From tables to frames, Aleksander Pivk,
Philipp Cimiano and York Sure address the automation
of the data annotation process by discussing a methodology for generating F-logic frames from tables. They
claim that this scalable approach permits the population
of ontologies with data stored in heterogeneous table
structures that would not otherwise be made available
by search or query engines. The methodology is based
on a cognitive table model that is generic enough to
capture table-like structures of different types. HTML
tables are used to demonstrate the applicability of this
methodology and its evaluation.

In What would it mean to blog on the Semantic Web?, Dennis Quan and David Karger investigate
the potential of capturing and exploiting the inherent
semantic structure of web logs (blogs) and introduce
semantic blogging as a paradigm for metadata generation and publication on the Semantic Web. Ontologies
extending the RSS specifications are proposed along

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2005.07.002

Preface / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 3 (2005) 7778

with an environment for semantic blogging based on
the Haystack Semantic Web browser. The authors claim
that their approach enables the integration of information from multiple blogs and the Semantic Web without
the restrictions of single-blog viewing and without the
need for a central authority.

In LUBM: a benchmark for OWL knowledge base
systems, Yuanbo Guo, Zhengxiang Pan and Jeff Heflin
present LUBM, the Lehigh University Benchmark featuring an ontology for the university domain and a
method for synthetic OWL data generation. The paper
addresses the need for establishing benchmarks for
testing the scalability of repositories of knowledge
expressed in OWL. The benchmark comprises fourteen
extensional queries representing a variety of properties
and it has been applied for comparing the performance
of two memory-based systems and two systems with
persistent storage varying in their storage models and
their query evaluation techniques. Experimental results
and conclusions drawn from the experiments using the
proposed benchmark are reported.

Finally, in Information gathering during planning
for web service composition, Ugur Kuter, Evren Sirin,
Dana Nau, Bijan Parsia and James Hendler present a
hierarchical task-network planning algorithm intended
to support
the composition of services described
using OWL-S ontologies. The proposed algorithm
(ENQUIRER) employs information-gathering queries
issued at plan time, for providing information necessary for the planning process. The authors demonstrate
the soundness and completeness of the algorithm
and precisely characterize the likelihood of success
in finding a plan with the amount of available information and the quality of the derived plan. Results

of experiments with ENQUIRER that validate the
theoretical results are reported.

After extensions and revisions the papers invited to
this special issue underwent a thorough review process
under a very tight schedule. We thank the authors of
these papers for the submission of high-quality work
and the reviewers for the tremendous effort they put
into the task of evaluating these submissions. As with
ISWC 2004, online reviewing for this special issue
was supported by the Confious Conference Management System (http://www.confious.com) developed at
FORTH-ICS by Manos Papaggelis. We thank Manos
for his around-the-clock support of the review process.
Last, but certainly not least, we thank Frank van Harme-
len, the General Chair of ISWC 2004, without whose
efforts and guidance the conference would not have
been such a success.

We hope you have found this special issue of
the Journal of Web Semantics both stimulating and
enjoyable.

Sheila McIlraith


Department of Computer Science, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ont., Canada M5S 3H5

Dimitris Plexousakis
Department of Computer Science, University
of Crete and Institute of Computer Science
FORTH, Heraklion, Greece


Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 416 946 8484
fax: +1 416 978 1455
E-mail addresses: sheila@cs.toronto.edu
