Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 3 (2005) 245246

Editorial

World Wide Web Conference 2005Semantic Web track

In this special issue, you find the best five papers out
of a lot of 86 papers submitted to the Semantic Web
track at WWW-2005 and presented at Chiba, Japan, in
May 2005. What we found stuck out about the Semantic
Web track 2005 was that it did not stick out. During
submissions as well as during the shaping of the final
programme it remained unclear many times, whether
a paper would better go to the Semantic Web track
or one of the other tracks. This indicated clearly that
the Semantic Web is not a discipline separate of the
rest of the Webeven though it has indeed its own
foundations, some of which we see below. Rather, the
Semantic Web now weaves tightly into the fabric of
current day Web technologies. We take this as a very
healthy sign of where the Semantic Web is heading
today.

Let us now consider a paper about Semantic Web
Foundations first. It provides an elegant formulation
to state a context and refer to it by the concept of a
named graph:

Jeremy J. Carroll, Christian Bizer, Pat Hayes, and
Patrick Stickler: Named Graphs

Though RDF was set out to support metadata annotation for multiple resources, until the formalization of a
scheme as the one here, it has never been easily possible
to attribute RDF data to a particular context or resource.
Thus, this paper provides foundations to such diverse
needs as evolution, representation of provenance information or access controland provides an important
contribution to a revision and extension of RDF.

Next comes a paper about Semantic Web Develop-
ment. Everyone who has ever built a description logics

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2005 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2005.09.009

knowledge base of only medium size has found out that
a system response like this knowledge base is inconsistent is only slightly more helpful than a page fault
during software development. Therefore, all ontology engineers will appreciate the following contribu-
tion:

Aditya Kalyanpur, Bijan Parsia, Evren Sirin, James
Hendler: Debugging Unsatisfiable Classes in OWL
Ontologies

Semantic Web Querying featured prominently in
the conference and in the ongoing discussions about
SPARQL and its likes. The contribution

Haifeng Liu, Milenko Petrovic, Hans-Arno Jacob-
sen: Efficient and Scalable Filtering of Graph-based
Metadata

 tackles the problem from a non-standard angle by
considering continuous queries and the need to handle
such continuous queries in a most efficient fashiona
significant problem when considering all those daily
RSS feeds!

Then, two papers deal with the second generation

of Semantic Web Services:

Vikas Agarwal, Girish Chafle, Koustuv Dasgupta,
Neeran Karnik, Arun Kumar, Sumit Mittal, and Biplav Srivastava: Synthy: A System for End to End
Composition of Web Services

This contribution shows that a successful Semantic
Web Service environment will have to include the complete life cycle support for Semantic Web Services and
offer a layered approach for this purpose.

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 3 (2005) 245246

Finally, Sabou et al. consider a crucial bottleneck of
Semantic Web Services. While automatic composition
of Web Services is heavily discussed and now treated
to increasing extents as in the previous contribution,
what is often ignored, is the actual annotation of the
Web Service with semantics. Sabou et al. consider the
difficult issue of providing the appropriate domain ontology for the annotation by efficient means of ontology
learning.

Marta Sabou, Chris Wroe, Carole Goble, and
Heiner Stuckenschmidt: Learning Domain Ontologies for Semantic Web Service Descriptions

In doing so, they teach us that surprisingly simple ontology learning techniques, as available in many current
ontology learning systems, may practically reach out
rather far.

With such practical requirements and proposals
feeding back into the development of the Semantic Web
infrastructure, contributions to the Semantic Web track
of WWW have matured quite a lot since its inception
at WWW-2002. We invite the readers to learn and understand from these contributions to the Semantic Web
track at WWW-2005and join WWW with their resulting ideas in 2006.


Steffen Staab
ISWebInformation Systems and
Semantic Web Research Group, University of
Koblenz-Landau, Universitatsstrasse 1, 56070
Koblenz, Germany
Tel.: +49 261 287 2761, fax: +49 261 287 2721.
E-mail address: staab@uni-koblenz.de
URL: http://www.isweb.uni-koblenz.de

