Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 3738 (2016) 5354

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are large networks of entities,
their semantic types, properties, and relationships between
entities. They have become a powerful asset for search, analytics,
recommendations, and data integration. Rooted in academic
research and community projects such as BabelNet, ConceptNet,
DBpedia, Freebase, Nell, Wikidata, WikiTaxonomy, Yago and
others, KGs are now intensively used at big industrial stakeholders.
Examples are the Google Knowledge Graph, Facebooks Graph
Search, Microsoft Satori, Yahoo Knowledge, as well as thematically
specialized knowledge bases in business, finance, life sciences, and
more. Many of these knowledge sources are available as Linked
Open Data or RDF exports.

The recent recognition of KGs as a meaningful paradigm in
research and industry does by no means imply that there is
wide agreement on an underlying set of models and methods.
Quite the opposite is the case: KG-based ideas and solutions have
been developed independently in many different contexts, using
a variety of approaches that extend well beyond the traditional
Semantic Web technology stack.
It is a field that has been
founded bottom up, driven by practical needs. So approaches
remain diverse, and many of the solutions we see today are still
in their infancy. The goal of this special issue is to provide a
stage for research on recent advances in knowledge graphs and
their underlying semantic technologies. Open challenges in this
broad field range from the initial creation and consolidation of
knowledge graphs, over efficient graph data management at large
scales, and on to new ways of using KGs in applications. We
are delighted to present a special issue that touches upon many
important topics across this wide spectrum.

Indeed, the special issue has been very well received in the
research community, as witnessed by a total number of 32
submissions across many topics. A dedicated committee of more
than 40 reviewers conducted a rigorous selection process. In the
end, we could select eight papers for inclusion in the special
issue, corresponding to an acceptance rate of 25%. Together, these
contributions cover the whole lifecycle of modern KGs, and provide
practically valuable methods, tools and resources, as well as some
deep foundational insights.

The use of knowledge graphs must necessarily start with
the acquisition and often also the integration of data from a
variety of sources. Several papers in this special issue focus on
challenges that arise in this context. Mohsen Taheriyan et al.
address the issue of how to integrate data from existing data
sources, such as relational DBs, CSV, XML or JSON, which are
already structured but not mapped to any ontology, so as to
facilitate their integration in KGs. In their article Learning the
Semantics of Structured Data Sources, they present a method

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2016.04.002
1570-8268/
 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V.

for learning semantic models based on the models of previously
integrated data sources. Their method generates ranked lists of
potential semantic interpretations, which are offered to expert
users for finding the best match.

When data cannot be imported from structured sources, KGs
may still be constructed automatically by extracting information
from unstructured sources. A typical example for this are news
articles, which are often ignored by todays KGs. The article
Building Event-Centric Knowledge Graphs from News by Marco
Rospocher et al. addresses this issue by constructing a carefully
engineered pipeline for extracting structured data from news. The
work integrates many existing techniques in natural language
processing and proposes event-centric knowledge graphs to
integrate the results.

Once KGs have grown to a certain size, problems of efficient
and scalable data management come to the fore. RDF databases
are already very competitive when it comes to managing large
graphs, but many KGs require quads rather than mere triples in
order to represent annotations on data. This motivates the work
of Anas Katib et al. in their article RIQ: A New Approach For Fast
Processing of SPARQL Queries on RDF Quadruples. The novelty of
their method lies in the use of a two-level indexing strategy, which
splits RDF quadruple data into groups of similar graphs and then
indexes each of them independently. Experiments show that this
can lead to significant performance gains in some scenarios.

Even when restricting to triple-based RDF graphs, performance
and scalability remain major practical issues. Ruben Verborgh et
al. motivate their work Triple Pattern Fragments: a Low-cost
Knowledge Graph Interface for the Web by the observation that
it can often be very costly to maintain highly available SPARQL
query services. As an alternative, they propose a scheme that
delegates part of the query processing to the client. Servers in this
scheme only provide a restricted form of indexed data retrieval for
which availability and performance is easier to guarantee. As an
interesting side effect, the emerging infrastructure can also be used
for federated query answering across several data sources.

The remaining four articles in the special issue are elaborating
several aspects of using KGs in practical applications. Marcelo
Arenas et al. consider the SPARQL query problem from a
user perspective. Their article Faceted Search over RDF-Based
Knowledge Graphs develops a theory of faceted search for
KGs that use OWL ontologies for semantic modelling. The work
provides practical interfaces and a working implementation, but
it also answers the important question which SPARQL queries can
be expressed in this approach in principle.

Alberto Tonon et al. tackle the problem of supporting users
in querying KG data from another perspective. Their contribution

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 3738 (2016) 5354

Contextualized Ranking of Entity Types based on Knowledge
Graphs starts from the observation that meaningful data displays
are often based on the type (that is, on the class) of an entity,
which is used, e.g., to achieve interface customisation. A relevant
problem then is to select the most appropriate entity type for a
given context. The authors approach this problem by ranking entity
types based on the browsing context of a user, as given by the
occurrence of references to KG entities within a textual document.
A necessary prerequisite for this approach of Tonon et al. is
that occurrences of named entities in natural language texts can
reliably be mapped to corresponding entities in a KG. Toni Gruetze
et al. present a new take on this important problem in their work
CohEEL: Coherent and Efficient Named Entity Linking through
Random Walks. Their specific goal is to optimise for high precision
while retaining good recall. To this end, two distinct classifiers
are combined using a method that explores the neighbourhood of
entities using random walks with restart.

Finally, the work Sar-graphs: A Language Resource Connecting
Linguistic Knowledge with Semantic Relations from Knowledge
Graphs by Sebastian Krause et al. shows a way of using KGs to
obtain a new type of linguistic resource that grounds knowledge in
natural language. Their graphs of semantically-associated relations
can help in creating bigger KGs, thereby closing the cycle of KGrelated tasks that is covered in this special issue. A strong point

of this work is that it does not depend on the peculiarities of the
chosen language or KG contents. The authors provide a free tool as
well as a collection of extracted sar-graphs for the benefit of the
research community.

The vast field of research challenges motivated by knowledge
graphs can of course not be covered within a single issue, but
we do hope that the selection of works presented here can give
a valuable impression of some of the current achievements and
future challenges in the area, including its many ties to more
traditional topics in Semantic Web. We would like to thank the
authors of all papers in this special issue, and also the authors of
all submissions, demonstrating that this is a very vital field. We
are most grateful to all reviewers who have contributed their time
and expertise, and often provided extremely detailed feedback that
helped to improve many papers significantly. We also thank Ian
Horrocks for his support as editor in chief, and Jenny Dollard for
her administrative and organisational help.

Markus Krotzsch
TU Dresden, Germany

Gerhard Weikum
