Enrichment and Ranking of the YouTube Tag Space  

and Integration with the Linked Data Cloud 

Smitashree Choudhury1, John G. Breslin1,2, and Alexandre Passant1 

1 DERI, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland 

2 School of Engineering and Informatics, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland 

{smitashree.choudhury,john.breslin,alexandre.passant}@deri.org 

Abstract.  The  increase  of  personal  digital  cameras  with  video  functionality 
and video-enabled camera phones has increased the amount of user-generated 
videos on the Web. People are spending more and more time viewing online 
videos  as  a  major  source  of  entertainment  and  infotainment.  Social  websites allow users to assign shared free-form tags to user-generated multimedia 
resources, thus generating annotations for objects with a minimum amount of 
effort.  Tagging  allows  communities  to  organise  their  multimedia  items  into 
browseable sets, but these tags may be poorly chosen and related tags may be 
omitted.  Current  techniques  to  retrieve,  integrate  and  present  this  media  to 
users are deficient and could do with improvement. In this paper, we describe 
a framework for semantic enrichment, ranking and integration of web video 
tags using Semantic Web technologies. Semantic enrichment of folksonomies 
can  bridge  the  gap  between  the  uncontrolled  and  flat  structures  typically 
found  in  user-generated  content  and  structures  provided  by  the  Semantic 
Web. The enhancement of tag spaces with semantics has been accomplished 
through two major tasks: (1) a tag space expansion and ranking step; and (2) 
through  concept  matching  and  integration  with  the  Linked  Data  cloud.  We 
have explored social, temporal and spatial contexts to enrich and extend the 
existing  tag  space.  The  resulting  semantic  tag  space  is  modelled  via  a  local 
graph  based  on  co-occurrence  distances  for  ranking.  A  ranked  tag  list  is 
mapped and integrated with the Linked Data cloud through the DBpedia resource  repository.  Multi-dimensional  context  filtering  for  tag  expansion 
means that tag ranking is much easier and it provides less ambiguous tag to 
concept matching. 

1   Introduction 

A key feature of the Social Web is the change in the role of a user from simply being 
a consumer of media: they are now content creators. It is not just textual content that 
can be shared, annotated or discussed, but any  multimedia content such as pictures, 
videos,  or  even  presentation  slides.  With  tools  like  iMovie  for  video  creation  and 
digital cameras with built-in WiFi for instant uploads, web users can easily add their 
multimedia  content  to  social  media  websites.  With  this  ease  of  creation,  there  is  an 
ever increasing amount of multimedia in various formats becoming available on the 

A. Bernstein et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2009, LNCS 5823, pp. 747762, 2009. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

S. Choudhury, J.G. Breslin, and A. Passant 

Social Web. Recently YouTube1 reported that 20 hours of video were being uploaded 
per minute, which amounts to 28,800 hours of video uploaded in one day to that site. 

All of these videos are being annotated by users with free unstructured keywords. 
Some video sharing sites also permit sharing and collaboration in the tagging process 
by  allowing  other  users  to  tag  a  video,  thereby  giving  a  sense  of  collective  intelli-
gence.  Current  techniques  to  retrieve,  integrate  and  present  this  tagged  media  to 
users  are  deficient  and  could  certainly  benefit  from  improvement.  Semantic  technologies make it possible to give richer descriptions to media, facilitating the process 
of locating, combining diverse media from various sources and personalising content 
recommendation. 

A major problem is that the textual annotations vary in terms of quality and their 
ability to describe the  video content. The tags include  not only the content but also 
information about the user, their subjective opinion of the content,  misspelling, and 
emerging co-joined tags. Given the ambiguity, subjectivity and noise in tags, one of 
the  fundamental  problems  is  to  learn  the  relevance  of  the  tag  corresponding  to  the 
content. Unstructured and informal descriptions rule out any kind of interoperability 
of the resources across similar and related content. An attempt to give a well-defined 
structure and to formalise the tag space for user-generated videos will be the first step 
towards a desired solution. Moreover, we believe that this could be an efficient way to 
add relevant semantics to videos on the Web, in combination with existing initiatives, 
such as the MPEG7 [10] standard and its associated RDF(S)/OWL mappings (that can 
be used to represent image regions and add particular annotations about them) and the 
current  tasks  of  the  W3C  Media  Annotation  Working  Group,  as  defined  in  their 
document on web video2.  

In this study, we have designed a framework to explore the contribution of various 
types of contextual data to the tag space and their relevance in ranking. Information 
embedded in video contexts such as social, spatial and temporal contexts are a good 
source  for  video  tag  suggestions.  Enriching  tags,  though  helpful  for  more  reliable 
descriptions of content, can at the same time add noise to the resulting video meta-
data.  In  order  to  attenuate  the  noise  from  the  tag  space,  we  need  to  rank  the  tags. 
Studies  have  been  carried  out  recently  on  the  relevance  of  ranking  tags  for  documents and images, but to our knowledge there is no study yet to rank tags for user 
videos on the Web. After tag ranking, we consider linking this enriched data to the 
open  Web  following  the  principles  envisioned  in  the  Linking  Open  Data  (LOD) 
initiative [15]. This rich data cloud gives each object and concept a unique identifier 
(URI) which is referenceable and linkable on the Web, such that they can make reference to each other irrespective of the vocabulary used. Three video resources may 
be  described  with  three  different  tags  new  york  city,  nyc  and  big  apple  by 
three different users, but the intended meaning is the same, i.e. the city of New York. 
When we look for new york city, we may not find the other two even though both 
of them are describing the same content. If we can disambiguate these three and link 
to one identifier, this makes retrieval much easier. To address this problem a solution 
is to disambiguate each tag to an ontological concept identified by its own URI [27]. 
Since  tags  are  simple  uncontrolled  keywords,  they  inherit  the  same  IR-related  

                                                           
1 http://www.youtube.com/ 
2 http://www.w3.org/2008/WebVideo/Annotations/ 
?

?

?
problems of synonyms and polysemy, as described in [26] and [27]. A robust disambiguation method is needed for direct tag-to -concept matching. In the present study, 
we have not described the tag-to-concept matching module in much detail, but rather 
we  have  described  the  applicability  of  tag-to-concept  matching  and  the  benefits  of 
interlinking  to  the  structured  world.  The  final  output  of  the  framework  is  a  set  of 
RDF triples describing  the  video and  its contextual  metadata  with  the  support of a 
video model and various existing lightweight ontologies such as Dublin Core, SIOC, 
MOAT, FOAF, etc. 

The rest of the paper is organised as  follows. Section 2 describes various related 
studies  in  tag  suggestion  ranking  and  semantic  integration.  Section  3  describes  the 
system  architecture  and  its  modules.  Section  4  describes  the  integration  of  the  enriched video tag space and metadata into the Linked Data Cloud. This is followed by 
experiments  and  evaluation  in  section  5,  after  which  we  will  conclude  with  some 
remarks and future directions in the final section. 

2   Related Tag Studies 

Strongly  descriptive  and  unambiguous  tags  are  the  first  step  toward  more  effective 
retrieval and interoperability across Social Web data sources. Much research has been 
carried out recently in refining user-generated tags to make them more semantically 
interoperable. Numerous studies [1], [8] have been carried out to suggest relevant tags 
for media documents based on supervised learning techniques, where the models are 
built  for specific domains and co-relations of low-level  features to tags are learned. 
However, due to the numerous amounts of visual variations, many efforts are far from 
satisfactory  and  moreover  are  restricted  to  a  small  domain  of  applications.  Manual 
and  collaborative  tagging  is  one  of  the  alternatives  adopted  by  most  popular  media 
sharing sites such as Flickr and YouTube. This of course adds other problems as described in the first section of this paper. These problems have led to many studies in 
the field of folksonomies, user-tagging behaviours, semantic tagging and tag refine-
ment. We will describe some of the studies relevant to the present study and outline 
how they differ from the present study. These studies mainly come under three different groupings: tag suggestion, tag ranking and tag semantics. 

2.1   Tag Suggestion 

In the field of tag suggestion, different but simultaneous approaches have been pursued by researchers to improve both automatic annotations and multimedia annotation 
quality. Researchers from the machine vision community are now focusing on gathering contextual data together with content processing to bridge the semantic gap [19], 
while  other  researchers  [17]  are  purely  focusing  on  social  data  combined  with  a 
knowledge base to augment media with social annotations3. Though both approaches 
have their valid points, harvesting social data is not only inexpensive but can contribute significantly to bootstrapping the content understanding process. 

The informal nature of tagging means that semantic information cannot be directly 
inferred from an annotation, as any user can tag any resource with whatever strings 
                                                           
3 http://acronym.deri.org/ 

S. Choudhury, J.G. Breslin, and A. Passant 

they wish. However, studying the collective tagging behaviour of a large number of 
users allows emergent semantics to be derived [14]. Through a combination of such 
mass collaborative structural semantics (via tags, geo-temporal information, ratings, 
etc.) and extracted multimedia content semantics (which can be used for clustering 
purposes,  e.g.  image  similarities  or  musical  patterns),  relevant  annotations  can  be 
suggested  to  users  when  they  contribute  multimedia  content  to  a  community  site  
by  comparing  new  items  with  related  semantic  items  in  ones  implicit  and  explicit 
networks. 

2.2   Tag Ranking 

Research into tag ranking began with studies [1] and [8] where ranks were assigned 
with  respect  to  visual  content  as  the  result  of  supervised  machine  learning  ap-
proaches,  where  models  map  relationships  between  visual  features  and  semantic 
concepts.  Uncontrolled  visual  content  where  there  are  a  vast  number  of  concepts 
involved  makes  the  above  approach  less  effective,  and  led  to  another  approach  for 
tag  ranking  which  followed  usage  statistics  by  studying  tag  co-occurrence  over  a 
large corpus. Sigurbjornsson et al. ranked Flickr tags [3] by  means of co-occurring 
tags. Hotho et al. [11] suggested Folkrank for community detection in Delicious tags. 
Relevance  ranking  by  means  of  frequency  counting  for  neighbouring  images  
(in  terms  of  visual  similarity)  was  conducted  by  Li  et  al.  [4],  where  they  selected 
common  tags  from  neighbouring  images  for  higher  ranking.  A  recent  study  on  tag 
ranking by Liu et al [9] proposed a tag rank for Flickr images by means of a random 
walk. Our ranking module is in the same general domain with the exception that we 
enriched our tag space before ranking to tackle the problem of tag sparsity in YouTube videos. 

2.3   Tag Semantics 

Studies in tag semantics fall into two broad categories: a corpus-based or statistical 
approach and a knowledge-based approach. Initial studies [2] on folksonomies explored  means  of  leveraging  the  statistical  co-occurrence  relations  between  tags  
to define their semantics, and knowledge-based approaches refer to external knowledge  sources  such  as  thesaurus  and  ontologies  to  define  the  tag  meaning  [20].  
Rattenbury et al. [5] explored tag-usage statistics to determine the events and place 
semantics  from  Flickr  tags  using  burst  detection  analysis.  Research  in  [6]  used 
online  ontologies  and  WordNet  [17]  to  map  tags  for  Flickr  tags  to  concepts.  
Simon et al. [7] used Wikipedia categories and template structures to classify Flickr 
tags and these were mapped to WordNet concepts. 

Other works on the topic include studies regarding the emergent semantics of tagging systems. Among others, [22] used an approach based on related co-occurrences 
of  tags  to  extract  hierarchical  relationships  between  concepts,  modeled  in  RDFS, 
while  [23]  defined  a  socially-aware  approach  for  building  ontologies  by  combining 
social  network  analysis  and  clustering  algorithms  based  on  folksonomies.  More  re-
cently,  FolksOntology  [29]  and  FLOR  [28]  also  provide  frameworks  for  automated 
semantic enrichment of tagged data. 
?

?

?
Finally,  various  models  have  been  developed  to  capture  the  semantics  of  
tagging  systems  using  lightweight  ontologies,  such  as  SCOT  [25],  MOAT  [24]  or  
CommonTag4. 

3   System Architecture 

In this section,  we will give a detailed description of the tag expansion and ranking 
system that we have built. We begin with a general overview of the different modules, 
followed by an explanation of the tag filtering and expansion step, then we will describe the tag graph creation process, and finally we will detail the tag ranking methods by means of spreading activation over the tag graph. 

Fig. 1. Work flow of the tag enrichment, ranking and linking processes 

 

The  goal  of  this  work  is  to  enrich  the  user-generated  tag  space,  and  to  rank  and 
interlink  the  tags  to  DBpedia  concepts  for  greater  integration  with  other  datasets. 
DBpedia is considered as a central node in the LOD cloud (the DBpedia nucleus), and 
linking  to  DBpedia  also  allows  one  to  reach  other  datasets,  thanks  to  the  network 
effect of this project. There are three main modules in the system, each of which consists of many sub-modules. Figure 1 shows the normal work flow of the system: (1) 
context  analysis  and  tag  expansion;  (2)  tag  ranking,  and  (3)  concept  mapping  and 
linking to the Semantic Web. 

3.1   Context Analysis and Tag Expansion 

In this section, we describe our first module that implements the tag expansion strat-
egy.  Because  of  the  sparseness  of  video  tags,  we  need  to  expand  the  tag  base  with 
various other contextual sources such as social, temporal and geographical contexts. 
                                                           
4 http://commontag.org/ 

S. Choudhury, J.G. Breslin, and A. Passant 

We  will begin  with a description of our  pre-processing step. User-generated tags 
consist of three broad categories of tags: functional tags (meaningful and mostly single keywords), noisy tags, and compound or emerging tags. Compound or emerging 
tags are those tags consisting of two or more keywords without any white space such 
as friendsoftheearth, iswc09 (used for friends_of_the_earth, ISWC_2009 respec-
tively). There are other categories of tags which are subjective or judgmental tags, as 
studied by [21] and these reflect a users view point rather than the video content, for 
example,  funny,  wonderful,  watch  this,  etc.  In  our  system,  we  excluded  tags 
with less than three characters, subjective tags, non-English tags, and tags describing 
usernames for the purpose of this study. However, there can be some difficulty with 
compound tags as these tags are not common words, and further work must be performed  to  identify  meaningful  tags  from  these  composite  sets.  The  textual  content 
from  the  video  title  and  descriptions  are  subject  to  the  same  kind  of  pre-processing 
described above, including stopword removal. 

3.2   Semantic Tag Space Enrichment 

In this module, we work on the tag space enrichment process where the sparse video 
tag  space  is  enriched  with  multiple  contextual  sources.  The  sources  are  of  various 
natures and exist in the context of the video in question: 

1. 
2. 

3. 
4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

Other textual contexts such as title and description of the video 
Geospatial contexts, such as the place where the video has been recorded 
(latitude and longitude coordinates available through the YouTube API) 
Temporal contexts, e.g. recording time 
Social contexts, e.g. groups or playlists that include the tagged video as 
an item 
Related videos, i.e. videos sharing some specific characteristics such as 
tags or time and space 
User  contexts,  such  as  the  type  of  user  that  includes  the  video  in  their 
bookmarks or favorites list 
Context  from  the  Web  itself,  i.e.  other  websites  delivering  information 
about these tags 

We  have  considered  the  first  five  contextual  sources  to  increase  the  tag  space,  and 
omitted the last two, which may be the subject of another study. Textual contexts such 
as video titles, descriptions and categories are used to rank the tag weights and sometimes add extra tags that are missing in the tag space itself. To avoid noise propaga-
tion, weights are added to different sources. 

A playlist extreme sailing can include videos whose tag space is more compact 
and clustered from the general sailing tag space. Playlist and group structures where 
videos and users are members can propagate tags to the individual video items [18]. 

Related Videos in YouTube are those videos that are considered similar to the 
original video in some aspects. YouTube provides a related video feed for each video. 
It is not known on what basis YouTube ranks the relatedness of a video, and sometimes  the  results  are  unexpected.  Moreover,  YouTube  feeds  cannot  be  filtered  with 
complex queries such as give me the videos related to the query where relatedness is 
based  on  a  shared  tag  space,  should be  from  the  same  place,  and  must  be  within  a 
?

?

?
time range, but not from the same user without a lot of work, so we decided to generate a list of related videos for each video from our own data set. The related videos 
are judged based on mutual content information in tag space. We adopted a space and 
time normalisation criteria in selecting the related  videos.  To explain this,  if videos 
share a time and place value with the original video, they are ranked higher in relat-
edness. The intuitive explanation for this is that videos from the same place and same 
time are more likely to capture the same events and content [5]. Videos from Galway 
(a geographical area) from 30-05-2009 to 01-06-2009 are more likely to contain the 
events Salthill air show and Volvo Ocean Race, so accordingly there is a definitive  pattern  of  high-frequency  tags  such  as  Salthill,  air  show,  red  arrows, 
beach, Volvo Ocean Race, etc. 

Spatial context is information regarding the geolocation where the video has been 
recorded or the place that the content describes, which can be extracted from the geo 
coordinates. Temporal context is the time of video recording (not publishing). Table 1 
shows the comparative tag spaces of related videos with and without time and space 
filters. This contextual information not only expands the initial tag space, but it also 
adds weights to the tags. The intermediate list of tags is the input for the final phase of 
tag  expansion  and  recommendation  based  on  tag  co-occurrence.  Table  2  shows  the 
first phase of tag expansion. 

Table 1. Comparative tag spaces of related videos with and without filters 

Original Video Tags 
Planes, Air show, Galway 

Original Video Tags 

MOV04687, Galway, Ireland, air 
show 

Related Video Tags Without Filter 
Planes, Air show, red_arrows, Volvo Ocean 
Race, Galway, Ireland, Panasonic, NV-
GS330, NV, GS, 330, NV-GS 
Related Video Tags With Time and Space 
Filters 
heart, festival, raf, in-port, race, 
beach, galway_bay, salthill, Volvo 
Ocean Race, red arrows, beach 

Title 
Description 
Tags 
Related Videos 

Geolocation 

Table 2. Multi-contextual tag expansion 

Planes Salthill Galway 
same planes!! 
Planes, air show 
heart, festival, raf,  
in-port, race, beach,  
galway_bay, salthill, 
Volvo Ocean Race, red 
arrows, beach 
Galway, Ireland 

Planes, beach, Galway, 
Air show, raf, festival, 
salthill, red arrows, 
race, in-port, 
volvo_ocean_race, heart, 
Ireland, galway_bay 

Tag co-occurrence is one of the key enablers towards creating a more comprehensive 
semantically-related tag space for the video. Co-occurrence between two tags occurs 
when both the tags are used to label the same resource. We opted for a second phase 

S. Choudhury, J.G. Breslin, and A. Passant 

of  tag  expansion  based  on  tag  co-occurrence  if  the  tag  set  (N  <  5)  is  less  than  five 
after  the  first  stage  of  expansion.  Raw  co-occurrence  gives  a  weak  relationship  
as  there  may  be  many  occurrences  of  less  descriptive  tags  such  as  news  for  all  
news category videos. Therefore, it is natural to normalise the count in order to reduce 
the bias. 

Intuitively, one resource will not be tagged with equivalent tags but rather with related tags in which case the distance between them will not be symmetrical: d(t1, t2) = 
d(t2, t1). We have adopted an asymmetric approach of measuring co-occurrence using 
the equation: 

cd(t1, t2) = |t1t2|/|t1| 

(1)

It captures how often tag 2 (t2) occurs with tag 1 (t1) given the total number of occur-
rences.  It  gives  a  more  diverse  tag  space  when  compared  to  a  symmetric  cooccurrence coefficient. 

When we get a list of co-occurring tags for each of the tags from the list above we 
need a mechanism to aggregate them so that we can prepare the final list. Aggregation 
can be a simple voting mechanism where frequent candidate tags are ranked higher. 

3.3   Tag Ranking 

In this section we describe the detection of ranked nodes in the graph, beginning with 
an overview of the tag graph creation, and then describing spreading activation over 
the graph to rank the nodes. 

(a) 

(b) 

 

Fig. 2. (a) Tag graph for a video and (b) spreading activation from the node planes 

Given a video v  V and an extended tag set ET = {t1, t2, ... tn}, we create a local 
graph of tags. The tag graph is a directed weighted graph with tags as nodes and the 
links between nodes are weighted edges. The edge weight is an asymmetric correlation based on their co-occurrence. If the correlation value is less than a threshold () 
the tags are not connected. The co-occurrence relation is calculated as per equation 1. 
Figure 2 (a) shows a tag graph for the video. 
?

?

?
We have used the tag list as a loose semantic network based on their correlations, 
and  processed  the  network  using  spreading  activation.  Spreading  activation  as  an 
information processing algorithm is based on the theory of cognitive science [16] and 
human memory. It works on a semantic network of nodes and links where links are 
connections  between  nodes  based  on  certain  relationship.  Information  processing 
starts  when  the  activated  node  starts  spreading  its  energy  towards  the  neighboring 
nodes. At the end of processing, all nodes will have some activation value which was 
contributed through its relation with neighboring nodes. 

In  our  work,  we  have  used  the  video  tags  as  nodes  of  the  network  and  their  cooccurring relations as the weighted link between nodes. The relationship between tags 
can  be  semantic  as  in  WordNet  and  other  ontologies,  or  it  can  be  based  on  cooccurrence patterns as observed in web data. We have opted for co-occurrence relations 
to connect the tags as a network. The activation process includes the following steps: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 
5. 
6. 

The graph nodes are assigned an initial value of 0 except for the firing 
node which has an activation value of 1.0. 
It spreads its activation to all nodes in its immediate neighborhood that 
are connected to the source node. 
Output activation is a function of (initial activation + (initial activation * 
edge strength) * d), where d is a decay factor set up experimentally. In 
our case it is .85. 
If the node value exceeds a threshold, we fire the node again. 
The node activation value is the weighted sum of its contributing nodes. 
Each node activates once in the process. 

Following the above steps, we rank our extended tag list turned local graph. Experimentally we set up the decay factor to be .85 and the iteration was 1 for all the nodes 
as this graph is not a complex nested graph. The activation starts with the top node in 
the tag list. All the nodes except the firing nodes are assigned a value of 0. Once the 
energy propagation starts, the node spreads its energy to the connected nodes and the 
receiving amount of energy is a function of relationship strength and decaying energy 
factor. Figure 2 (b) shows the activation process starting with the node plane and 
spreading to three nodes air show, raf, red arrows (this node again spreads and 
contributes to the air show node). 

3.4   Linked Data Creation 

Once the tags are cleaned and ranked, they can then be connected to other similar and 
related resources. For example, there are videos of the Volvo Ocean Race on YouTube as well as on other media sharing sites such as Vimeo or Joost. To discover the 
entire spectrum we need to create a mapping mechanism from user tags to ontological 
resources  so  that  they  can  be  more  connected  and  discoverable.  This  is  where  the 
Linked  Open  Data  initiative  fits  in.  As  part  of  its  principles,  one  needs  to  identify 
every entity (object, concept, event, people) with a unique web identifier or URI on 
the Web. Following one URI will lead to the discovery of some more related informa-
tion.  This  simple  yet  powerful  idea  has  rapidly  gained  momentum  recently.  The 
Linked Open Data cloud now consists of more than a hundred datasets and billions of 
interlinked facts as entities. 

S. Choudhury, J.G. Breslin, and A. Passant 

There is the question of how best to integrate user-generated videos with the existing structured LOD cloud. Automatic mapping from tags to concepts is desirable, but 
challenging due to multiple contexts of the concept. Studies in MOAT5 showed that 
users are willing to do this manually when they realise the benefits of such an effort, 
for instance, if they get advanced browsing or querying features. 
 

 

Fig. 3. Connecting to multimedia datasets already interlinked within the Linked Data cloud 

In the present study, since we have a limited domain, the number of mappings is 
quite small so we used the semantic indexing engine Sindice6 to query DBpedia and 
select the most appropriate URIs. Automatic mapping of tags to concepts is ongoing 
work  to  be  reported  on  later.  Links  can  also  be  added  to user  accounts  (SIOC)  and 
locations (GeoNames) obtained from the YouTube API (Figure 3). 

3.5   Tags-to-Concept Mapping 

Tag-to-concept matching is not yet fully implemented and will be part of our future 
work. As part of the experiment we have used DBpedia resources. We presume that 
cross-resource mapping to other sources from the LOD initiative (such as Freebase) 
can easily be adapted. Depending on the context, some particular datasets may also be 
considered,  e.g.  a  genes  database  when  dealing  with  medical  videos.  Here,  we  will 
briefly describe our approach for tag-to-concept matching. Once the tags are finalised, 
we  use  a  two-step  process  for  assigning  concept  identifiers.  The  tags  are  fed  into  a 
local WordNet module and some simple heuristics are followed: 

1. 

If  the  tag  matches  with  a  WordNet  noun,  and  if  there  is  only  one  
matching synset, we select the corresponding WordNet URI in DBpedia 
(Figure 4). 

                                                           
5 http://www.moat-project.org/ 
6 http://sindice.com/ 
?

?

?
3. 

 

 

Enrichment and Ranking of the YouTube Tag Space and Integration 

If there are more than one WordNet synset, we send the tag and its context tags to a similarity module to compute the cosine similarity between 
the  current  tag  context  and  already-existing  tag  URIs.  (The  similarity 
module is based on the Lucene7 text retrieval Java library and on other 
work in progress). 
For those tags that are not part of WordNet, we send them to the semantic indexing engine Sindice to look for resources. Once we get the top k 
URIs for the query, the user can select the URI manually or else it is fed 
into  another  disambiguation  module  where  URIs  can  be  contextually 
disambiguated (not implemented yet). 

Fig. 4. Matching YouTube tags to DBpedia concepts 

 

4   Experiments and Evaluation 

4.1   Results 

We have collected 3,990 YouTube videos. All video metadata including the metadata 
of  related  videos  was  collected  through  the  YouTube  API.  We  collected  videos  of 
specific categories such as skiing, sailing and cricket. The data includes video 
tags, dates, places (if available), titles, descriptions and group tags (if available). The 
total number of unique tags is more than 11,900 which includes many misspellings, 
number  tags,  co-joined  tags,  and  subjective  as  well  as  meaningless  tags.  There  are 
2,261  distinct  users  in  the  data  set.  On  average,  one  user  has  less  than  two  videos. 
Since users tag differently depending on their background and expertise, we can assume a relatively heterogeneous tag source. We did a preliminary filtering of tags by 
removing stop words, tags with two characters and number tags. Though the tag list  
is far from clean, this reduces a lot of noise. This tag set is used for extracting the cooccurrence statistics. 
                                                           
7 http://lucene.apache.org/java/docs/ 

S. Choudhury, J.G. Breslin, and A. Passant 

Fig. 5. The number of times the most relevant tag was suggested at different positions 

 

We  conducted  a  preliminary  evaluation  to  explore  the  quality  of  our  ranking 
method and tag enhancement. We randomly selected 100 videos from the larger set to 
explore  potential  benefits  and  problems.  Three  users  familiar  with  the  topics  were 
asked to rank the tag lists of these videos on a scale of 1 to 4: most relevant, rele-
vant,  partially  relevant  and  irrelevant,  according  to  their  depicted  content.  We 
computed the amount of times the most relevant tag was ranked as most relevant by 
users, and we will now discuss the quality of our tag enhancement. 
 

Inter rater Agreement

Position1

position2

position 3

Position 4

User ratings

2 users

3 users

 

Fig. 6. Inter-rater agreement over the most relevant tag in the first four positions 

Though relatively small, the user feedback gave some interesting results. Regarding  inter-rater  variation,  we  considered  a  final  rank  when  a  minimum  of  two  users 
agreed on the same rank. For the 100 videos, Figure 5 shows that the most relevant 
tag came in at the top position 51 times (where a minimum of two users have agreed), 
whereas the top tag came second 27 times. Therefore, for almost 80% of the time, the 
top-ranked tag was in either of the first two positions. Figure 6 shows the inter-rater 
agreement over the tag relevance in the first four positions. 

Similarly, we tried to explore the tag enrichment task and its effectiveness in describing the content of the video. This evaluation was conducted at two stages: before 
 
?

?

?
Fig. 7. Comparative evaluation of the quality of the tag space 

 

the tag expansion and after the tag expansion. The users were asked to rank the original tag list on a three-point scale of (1) sufficient for the content, (2) okay, but can be 
improved, and (3) insufficient. The comparative results are in Figure 7. 

The  result  showed  that  the  tag  enrichment  process  increased  the  content  understanding  considerably.  Still,  28%  of  the  videos  need  improvement.  There  may  be 
many reasons for this such as more specific tag cleaning, insufficiency of the tag list, 
or perhaps due to noise propagation from the different contextual sources which were 
used. 

In the present  study, inter-rater agreement evaluation is only  focused on the topranked tag. Out of the 51 times where the system-suggested top tag was considered 
most  relevant  by  users,  two  users  agreed  33  times  and  three  users  agreed  18  times. 
However, in position two, out of 27 total times, all three users agreed that the tag was 
most relevant 25 times. An exhaustive analysis of user agreement over the relevance 
of suggested tags is desirable to explore possible room for improvements. 

We  will conclude this section by discussing  some potential benefits in applications  such  as  (1)  semantic  tag-based  search  and  retrieval,  and  (2)  improved  video 
categorisation. 

4.2   Semantic Tag-Based Search and Retrieval 

We evaluated our work in a retrieval framework and describe here two use cases of tagbased retrieval. Given a query q, the system will retrieve all the videos tagged with q but 
they will be ranked according to the ranked position of q in the tag space. Thus, if two 
videos tagged with q are retrieved, the video having q in a higher position will be ranked 
higher. Identifying tags with DBpedia URIs opens up many possibilities of knowledge 
discovery. A resource tagged with Volvo Ocean Race and identified with a URI such 
as  http://dbpedia.org/resource/Volvo_ocean_race  will  lead  us  to  discover  information about St._Petersburg, Russia as it is related to the query by means of destination 
port. A video tag identified with http://dbpedia/resource/Galway will lead us to discover more about the culture, events and history of Galway. 

4.3   Improved Video Categorisation 

Categories  in  YouTube  are  selected  by  users  when  uploading  videos.  Sometimes,  a 
user  selects  a  less-relevant  category  for  their  content  as  it  is  a  flat  single  category 

S. Choudhury, J.G. Breslin, and A. Passant 

system and the choices are also quite limited. In practice, video content may belong to 
more than one category, and moreover, it may follow a hierarchal structure. Based on 
our  enriched  tag  space,  we  can  suggest  a  hierarchical  categorisation  for  a  video  by 
exploiting the relations between tags. A video tagged with news, Japan, earthquake, 
building, tsunami can be categorized under News >> Natural Hazard >> Earthquake 
conforming to the hierarchical structure of existing ontologies such as the Large Scale 
Concept Ontology for Multimedia (LSCOM) [13]. In LSCOM, earthquake is a subclass of natural hazard. 

5   Conclusions 

In this paper, we propose a roundtrip semantic framework which provides some steps 
towards solving the above problem. The key modules that have been implemented are 
for tag enrichment, tag ranking, concept mapping and semantic linking. Tag enrichment involves various contextual analyses of the video and the contribution of these 
contexts  towards  content  understanding.  Context  not  only  includes  textual  descriptions  but  also  the  temporal,  spatial  and  social  contexts  in  which  the  video  is  being 
used  and  shared.  Interplaying  a  combination  of  contexts  provides  for  improved  
enrichment.  The  advantages  of  the  proposed  algorithm  for  tag  enrichment  are:  (1) 
multiple sources can make the tags more reliable for content description; (2) the subjective  ambiguities  are  reduced;  (3)  the  method  is  scalable  since  it  does  not  require 
any domain specific model training; and (4) it can evolve with tag usage. 

We have also proposed a tag-ranking algorithm performed over a local tag graph 
by means of spreading activation. The tag graph is based on the enriched tag set and is 
connected by means of co-occurrence strength. Spreading activation helps to activate 
the focused nodes and reduces the strength of noisy nodes. We also described the tag-
to-resource  mapping  (with  DBpedia  as  our  semantic  repository)  and  outlined  how 
Linked Data principles can aid with linking to user-generated video content. Successful linking to DBpedia web identifiers can harness other related data sources from the 
LOD cloud and then enrich information discovery from videos. 

Our future work includes a complete concept-to-URI matching mechanism and an 

explorative evaluation of the approach with more users. 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  supported  by  Science  Foundation  Ireland  under  grant  number 
SFI/08/CE/I1380 (Lion 2). 
