Vocabulary Matching for Book Indexing

Suggestion in Linked Libraries  A Prototype

Implementation and Evaluation

Antoine Isaac1,2, Dirk Kramer2, Lourens van der Meij1,2, Shenghui Wang1,2,

Stefan Schlobach1, and Johan Stapel2

1 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

{aisaac,lourens,swang,schlobac}@few.vu.nl,

2 Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Den Haag
{Dirk.Kramer,Johan.Stapel}@kb.nl

Abstract. In this paper, we report on a technology-transfer effort on
using the Semantic Web (SW) technologies, esp. ontology matching, for
solving a real-life library problem: book subject indexing. Our purpose
is to streamline one librarys book description process by suggesting new
subjects based on descriptions created by other institutions, even when
the vocabularies used are different. The case at hand concerns the National Library of the Netherlands (KB) and the network of Dutch local
public libraries. We present a prototype subject suggestion tool, which
is directly connected to the KB production cataloguing environment.
We also report on the results of a user study and evaluation to assess
the feasibility of exploiting state-of-the art techniques in such a reallife application. Our prototype demonstrates that SW components can
be seamlessly plugged into the KB production environment, which potentially brings a higher level of flexibility and openness to networked
Cultural Heritage (CH) institutions. Technical hurdles can be tackled
and the suggested subjects are often relevant, opening up exciting new
perspectives on the daily work of the KB. However, the general performance level should be made higher to warrant seamless embedding in
the production environmentnotably by considering more contextual
metadata for the suggestion process.

1 Introduction

Motivation Cultural Heritage (CH) institutions usually own well-described collections of objects, and publishing (descriptions of) their assets to unknown users
is an inherent part of their mission. Of course, both aspects are equally crucial
for the Web of Data: data with structured meta-data, and the drive to publish
data for unforeseen reuse.

This has lead to many CH institutions being at the forefront of developing and
applying Semantic Web (SW) technology. Important initiatives for representing
knowledge on the SW, such as Dublin Core [1] or SKOS [2], have been driven by
expertise and requirements from the CH domain. In turn, many recent projects

A. Bernstein et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2009, LNCS 5823, pp. 843859, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

A. Isaac et al.

have largely benefited from using SW techniques to make CH material accessible
more easily, e.g., in [3,4].

Given these success stories, it is no surprise to see yet another fruitful crossfertilisation opportunity between the two fields: semantic interoperability. In the
SW community, recognition of this problem has lead to exhaustive research in
ontology matching [5], the goal of which is to make interoperable the data expressed in different ontologies. Again, CH institutions have strong interest for
adapting this technology in their daily routine and for their future vision. Collections from different institutes are indeed described with different knowledge
organisation systems (KOS), such as thesauri. In a more and more inter-linked
CH world requiring cross-collection applications, alignments between different
KOSs become crucial.

Linking vocabularies across Dutch libraries. The National Library of the Netherlands (KB) holds numerous books also described by other libraries, many of them
having their own way of semantically describing (indexing) the content of books.
This leads to human indexers at the KB still going through each book to re-index
it in the KB way, i.e., using their own thesauri, although that book might have
already been described by some other institutions.

Such re-indexing process can be streamlined by suggesting indexers relevant
concepts from KB thesauri, based on other institutions descriptions. In the
context of the STITCH project, we implemented a prototype that provides such
a functionality. For each incoming book already indexed with concepts from the
Biblion thesaurus (used by Dutch public libraries), it suggests a new indexing
with the Brinkman subject thesaurus used in the KB. The suggestion is based
on semantic links between these two thesauri which are derived from generic
ontology matching methods [6,7].

This prototype has been directly connected to the KB production cataloguing
environment, used daily by indexers. To the best of our knowledge, KB is one
of the first non-academic institutions to use and thoroughly evaluate generic
ontology matching technology for a real-life application. This paper describes the
index suggestion prototype, an exhaustive evaluation, and some lessons learned,
particularly from the perspective of the SW technology that was used.

Evaluating the SW approach in practice. In order to assess the usefulness in
practice, we thoroughly evaluated our proposed methodology and prototype im-
plementation. We had two goals, for which involvement of KB staff at all levels
(management, technical and userindexers) was critical:

 technology transfer. STITCH gathers researchers and practitioners to investigate how SW technology can be used to solve CH interoperability issues.
In previous experiments, researchers have played a leading role. Here, KB is
sought to actively participate in all steps of the development of a SW-based
tool, from data preparation to design and testing.

 feasibility study. This prototyping experiment had to determine whether
and to which extentKB could benefit in the medium term from the techniques employed. The tool must deliver appropriate suggestion performance,
?

?

?
and its design has to fit existing processes seamlessly, both at the conceptual
and technical levels. Evaluation is thus key, as is the realistic embedding of
the developed tool into the production process.

Findings Our suggestion prototype, on one hand, shows the limitation of the
used matching methods to provide high quality suggestions. However, the close
collaboration with KB staff gives us much deeper insight into the problem and,
importantly, points out potential improvements. In particular, exploiting existing book descriptions for matching thesauri is a valid approach. Only, it may
require more thesauri to be linked, in order to make the re-indexing process more
efficient.

From that perspective, it is crucial that the prototype demonstrated that SW
components can be successfully plugged into the KB production environment.
This brings the latter a higher level of flexibility and openness, making it better
interoperable with other providers (and consumers) of semantic data.

In Sec. 2 we present the specific case we addressed in our experiment. Sec. 3
then gives a general technical overview of our prototype. Sec. 4 describes our
user study and its results, before we conclude.

2 Book Re-indexing at the KB

To manage and allow access to its collections, KB relies on a careful description of
its books. This includes subject indexing, a concise and controlled reformulation
of book subjects, typically done by assigning concepts from a KOS. Indexing
requires trained employees to analyze the content of books and carefully pick
the most appropriate concept(s) for describing them. This is labor-intensive,
and KB is aiming to assist indexers by using (semi-)automatic techniques.

2.1 Existing Work on Assisting Document Description
The first approach to automated document description is to apply natural language processing tools to the textual content (or summary) of documents. In
SW research, text analyzers have been used to produce (structured) semantic
annotations along formal ontologies that are either pre-defined or learned on-
the-fly [8]. Similar techniques have also been deployed to produce document
annotations with KOSs that are closer to the ones used in librariessee [9,10].
However, these techniques require a sufficient amount of textual data, which
is not always available, especially for KB whose books have mostly not been dig-
itized. As a result, one has to find sets of related documents (as in the CHOICE
project [10]) or to exploit the limited textual information present in the metadata record (the title, sometimes a summary). KB already experimented with
the latter approach, without obtaining convincing results.

We have opted for a different approach, exploiting descriptions resulting from
a principled interpretation. Our problem is therefore to bridge across different
interpretations, using ontology matching, rather than bridge the semantic gap
between uninterpreted text content and controlled indexing.

A. Isaac et al.

Fig. 1. (Partial) cloud of related collections and KOSs in KBs environment

2.2 The Need for Re-indexing at KB

Our proposal is to assist indexers by re-using existing subject descriptions for
books, as contributed by other institutions. Quite often, indeed, a same book
can be of interestand thus describedby several actors. KB thus holds numerous books that are also held by other Dutch libraries, by publishers, or even
by foreign institutions. For instance, the collections of KB and the Dutch (local)
public libraries contain around a quarter of million books in common. Figure 1
shows some collections that are related to the KB ones. As the goals of the holding institutions often overlap, there is a certain amount of redundancy. Sharing
and connecting descriptions in such a network would thus generate interesting
synergies and productivity gains.

In fact, many libraries already share their descriptions. For instance, book
metadata in the KB is stored in a databaseOCLC-Picas GGCwhich is
also used by other libraries for shared cataloguing, in particular, by the Dutch
academic libraries and the Dutch public libraries. However, if integration of
descriptions at a basic level (authors, publication date, etc.) could be done,
these libraries still perform subject indexing with their own KOSs, as depicted
in Fig. 1. Indexing is indeed largely application-specific: different collections are
gathered for specific information needs, and require descriptions with different
granularity or expertise levels, or even in different languages. There can be significant semantic overlap between the KOSs used, but it is not possible to benefit
directly from the work done by other institutions. To re-use existing descriptions
in the KB application context, they have first to be fit into KB needs.

In this paper, we focus on the specific KBpublic libraries case. KB, for indexing the subject of books in its legal deposit collection, uses the Brinkman subject
thesaurus (hereafter called Brinkman). This thesaurus has a generic scope and
?

?

?
contains more than 5,000 topical concepts. The main subject thesaurus used in
the public libraries is the Biblion general keyword thesaurus (hereafter called
Biblion) which contains approximately 18,000 concepts. KB indexers quite often have to re-index, with Brinkman concepts, books that have already been
indexed with Biblion, while the scope and structure of the two general thesauri
overlap quite much. The question is whether this re-indexing can be streamlined
by an automatic process providing indexers with candidate subjects.

2.3 Re-indexing Requirements
One solution is to create semantic correspondences between the elements of the
KOSs at hand, allowing to convert descriptions from one system to the other. This
scenario, described in [11], can be regarded as a problem of ontology matching.

In our case, re-indexing requires to implement a translation process from concepts of a Biblion-indexed book into Brinkman ones, so as to yield a Brinkman
indexing of that book. Such a functionality can be formalized by the function:

BI  2

,

fr : 2

where 2BI and 2BR denote the powersets of Biblion and Brinkman concepts.

At first sight, one expects such function to relate Biblion concepts to Brinkman
concepts that have semantically equivalent or close meaning. Variability issues
can however make such simple equivalence associations unfit. First, one same
book may be described by two semantically different concepts, even though each
of these concepts has an equivalent concept in the other KOS. This may for
instance stem from institutions indexing policies aiming at different description
granularity levels. Second, related to the way KOSs are designed, a concept from
one vocabulary may be expressed using several concepts from the other KOS,
which will be combined together to describe the subject of a book.

To the best of our knowledge, there is no similar work deploying ontology matching for migrating subject indexes from a KOS to another. Ontology
matching has been identified as a solution for the more general data migra-
tion/translation problem, but it is difficult to find examples of concrete deployments [5]. Also, in more industry-oriented database migration efforts, the focus is
rather on translating data from one schema to anotherthat is, focusing on the
relation between (metadata) fields rather than the values that populate them.
Finally, in the CH domain, most projects exploiting KOS alignments focus on
query reformulation or cross-collection browsing (as in HILT1 or the SW-based
Europeana Thought Lab2), which are related but different application issues.

3 Prototype Design
3.1 General Description
The core functionality of our Brinkman subject suggestion tool (SST) is to
use available Biblion indexing and other metadata to suggest new Brinkman

http://hilt.cdlr.strath.ac.uk/
http://www.europeana.eu/portal/thought-lab.html

A. Isaac et al.

indexing. This functionality is coupled to the WinIBW software used to describe
books in the production process of the KB acquisition and cataloguing depart-
ment. WinIBW is connected to the aforementioned GGC cataloguing system,
which is also used by the public libraries. The metadata including Biblion indexing can therefore be accessed and exploited seamlessly.

The SST can be activated when an indexer describes a book already indexed
with a Biblion subject. A pop-up window presents then the new Brinkman sug-
gestions. The correct suggestions can be selected and automatically inserted
within the description of the book currently being edited in WinIBW. After
this, the description is saved and stored in GGC.

In the following, we describe further the use and functioning of the SST, as

well as some aspects of the suggestion process itself.

3.2 User Interface

The SST can be launched for a given book being described in the WinIBW
system. It comes as a pop-up window split in two panels, as shown in Fig. 2. This
window gathers the existing metadata of the book and suggests new subjects.

The left-hand side displays the existing metadata, using a layout similar to
WinIBW. We reproduced this basic layout so as to integrate the prototype as
seamlessly as possible in the current process. In particular, our panel keeps to the

Fig. 2. The Suggestion Tools user interface
?

?

?
original description codeskenmerkcodes, or KMCs [12]. The only additions
are the use of color for spotting different elements, and the access to basic additional information services. For instance, 112X corresponds to the UNESCO
classification (very general, mostly subject-based classification of books, e.g.,
linguistics), 111X to KAR (the characteristic, roughly corresponding to
the type of publication, e.g., thesis), 1401 to DGP (intellectual level/target
group, e.g., youth fiction, 7-8 years) and 5061 to NUR (Dutch book trade
(topical) classification focused on genres, e.g., national history). Further descriptions of these elements can be accessed via online help resources.

The right-hand side of the screen presents the suggestions (bottom). Three
colors (blue, purple, red) are used to mirror the confidence level of the suggestions
(see Sec. 3.4 for more details). Indexers can select the suggestion(s) they agree
with by ticking them. There are also empty boxes for searching new concepts to
add to the description (Ander Brinkman onderwerp opzoeken).

For the user study, indexers are offered the possibility to give a general quality
assessment of the suggestions for the book (tevreden radio buttons) as well as
a comment (opmerking). When the screen has been filled, users can save the
new indexing and go back to WinIBW by pressing the STITCH button.

There is also the possibility to ask for more information on suggestions (the +
top-right), such as the concepts from the record that triggered them, and their
numerical confidence value. This shows more suggestions (with lower confidence).
Previously established alignments based on equivalence of concept labels (see
Sec. 3.4) can also be requested to provide more suggestions (the a top-right).

3.3 Architecture

Our SST prototype consists of various distributed components, as illustrated in
Fig. 3.

Indexers start from the WinIBW cataloguing interface, a Windows client.
Simply clicking a button, they launch a VisualBasic script that converts the
current book data in XML format and displays it into an Internet Explorer
pop-up window.

This window uses an XSLT stylesheet to display the book metadata, as well
as querying various services and displaying the information got from them as
XML data. To enhance information presentation, the stylesheet triggers access
to two business web servicesBol.com for book images and Picarta for obtaining
additional book information. To fulfill its main concept suggestion mission, it
accesses two alignment web services hosted on machines at the Free University
of Amsterdam. Primary suggestions are provided by a SWI-Prolog server that
exploits the statistical rules described in Sec. 3.4. Additional (lexical) alignments
(for the a option) are accessed via a SPARQL endpoint [13] on top of a Sesame3
RDF store.

At this stage, indexers can add one or more subjects, which they find with
the help of a vocabulary service (JavaScript/Ajax). When they are finished,

http://openrdf.org

A. Isaac et al.

Fig. 3. The Suggestion Tools architecture

clicking on the STITCH button sends back the created metadata into WinIBW
(JavaScript/VBScript).

For the purpose of evaluation, existing book metadata, suggestions and user
input (including the evaluation-specific satisfaction level and comments) are
also stored in XML (VBScript). A dedicated XLST stylesheet enables the redisplaying of that information for each considered book, as well as the creation
of tables with all gathered data.

Access to concept information is done via a generic SKOS vocabulary service4
we implemented in STITCH. To streamline management of KOSs in our archi-
tecture, we have opted for converting them to the SKOS standard to represent
KOSs in RDF [2]. The service allows to retrieve SKOS data for concepts (labels,
documentation, semantic relationships to other concepts) and enables searching
for concepts in a given KOS, e.g., by means of autocompletion. It thus provides
the basic means to explore vocabularies.

Crucially, the service can be used to access distributed RDF KOS sources,
published via either a SPARQL endpoint or other instances of the service that
are loaded with the corresponding SKOS files. This allows to seamlessly extend
our prototype to deal with unforeseen KOSs, when these are published in SKOS
on the Web of Data. Our SST could then be articulated with more collections,
even ones already linked at the semantic levelsee Fig. 1.

3.4 Brinkman Subject Suggestion Rules
The suggestion process relies on statistical techniques to find association between
the elements found in the available book metadata and the Brinkman concepts to

http://stitch.cs.vu.nl/repository
?

?

?
be suggested for indexing. For the sake of brevity, we limit ourselves here to the
description of what the suggestion tool outputs and which information sources it
uses, and only give an overall description of the suggestion rules creation process.

Metadata Used for Creating and Applying Suggestion Rules. In a
first version of the suggestion tool, we tried to build and exploit an alignment
between Biblion (LTR field) alone and Brinkman. The idea was to provide suggestions based on simple, ready-to-use individual translation rules from Biblion to Brinkman, as obtained from lexical comparison of their labels.

However, as previously mentioned, our case comprises books which are shared
between the KB and the public library collections. Many of these books (nearly
238K) are thus indexed with both Biblion and Brinkman. Following the reindexing evaluation approach of [11], we used the existing Brinkman subjects of
these books as a gold standard with which we could automatically compare new
suggested subjects. Based on the low performance of this preliminary automatic
evaluation, we decided to drop these first suggestion rules. They are only accessible via the advanced a option mentioned above, as a complementary source
of suggestions.

Matching techniques using the extension of concepts, namely the way they
co-occur in book descriptions, seemed much more promising. From a theoretical
perspective, they fit well the application scenario, which is about reproducing
indexing practices instead of trying to grasp the intrinsic meaning of concepts.
Practical evaluations in the case of other KOSse.g., for the Library track of the
Ontology Alignment Evaluation Initiative [14] and for STITCH research [15]
have further demonstrated that these techniques indeed perform well for re-
indexing.

As a matter of fact, the dually indexed corpus that we used for automatic
evaluation above could also be used as a learning set for deriving statistical associations between Biblion and Brinkman concepts. In order to fit the application
scenario better and to take into account potential indexing- and vocabularyrelated granularity mismatches, we sought to find suggestions based on combinations of one, two or three Biblion concepts. We also extended the matching
process by considering the values found in several metadata fields. This provides
more information to elicit finer-grained suggestion rules. Our prototype suggestion tool uses as input the following four metadata fields (and their associated
vocabularies of controlled values) used in books with Biblion indexing:

 LTR  Biblion concepts,
 AUT  main authors of books,
 KAR  (coded) characteristic and
 DGP  (coded) intellectual level/target group.

Establishment of Suggestion Rules. The most important source of information for the SST is the set of books which are described by both Brinkman
and Biblion. In order to analyse the reliability of the rules, we extracted a third
of this set as a new test set for automatic evaluation.

A. Isaac et al.

Suggestion rules are established by looking for statistical associations between
a source combination of metadata values (including at least one Biblion concept,
and optionally, one or two values for the AUT, KAR, DGP fields mentioned
above) and target Brinkman concepts. We adapted previous work on instancebased thesaurus matching [6,7] to fit the re-indexing scenario. Given a source
combination of metadata values, noted as Ci, the probability that a Brinkman
concept Bj should be suggested is calculated as
|Ci|

(1)
where |Ci  Bj| is the number of books which are described by both Ci and Bj
and |Ci| is the number of books which are described by Ci. In order to reduce
the bias from the sparseness of the data, we took a variation of (1):

p(Ci  Bj) =

|Ci  Bj|

p(Ci  Bj) =

|Ci  Bj|
|Ci|  0.46 

|Ci| + 1 ,

(2)

which gives the best performance in practiceas observed by automatic evaluation over the third of the dataset which we extracted for testing.

In this way, we established a set of 1.5 million suggestion rules, each with
a confidence levelin fact, the probability for a suggestion to be correct
determined by formula (2). Table 1 presents some of them. The left-hand side of
each rule corresponds to a combination of metadata values found in the training
set; the right-hand side corresponds to the Brinkman suggestion. The rightmost
column gives correct books, the number of books in our test set that had both

Table 1. Subject suggestion rules

Source combination  target concept

Confidence

level

Correct books

/ Total

DGP:Jeugd fictie; vanaf 13 jaar

(youth fiction; from 13 year)
+ KAR:Stripverhaal (comics)
 BTR:stripverhalen (comics)

0.995

182/182

LTR:Reisgidsen (travel guides) + LTR:Spanje (Spain)

 BTR:Spanje ; reisgidsen (Spain; travel guides)

0.982

50/50

...

LTR:Brabantse dialecten (Brabant dialects)
 BTR:Nederlandse dialecten (Dutch dialects)

0.967

27/27

...

LTR:Liefde (love) + AUT:Jeanette Winterson

 BTR:Romans en novellen ; vertaald

(novels and novellas; translated)

...

LTR:Bouwkunde (building engineering)
 BTR:leermiddelen ; bouwtechniek
(learning material ; building engineering)

0.540

1/1

0.196

25/123
?

?

?
the source combination and the target concept, and total, the number of books
that matched the source combination.

Working the Suggestion Rules. When a books metadata contains a suitable source combination (including Biblion subject indexing, and possibly, AUT,
KAR and DGP annotations), the SST suggests a list of Brinkman subjects, each
with a confidence value. This allows to rank the suggested concepts, as well as
to classify them in broader confidence categories indicated by specific colors, as
mentioned in Sec 3.2. Thus, blue suggestions correspond to a confidence level
higher than 0.54all suggestions based on concept combination (co-)occurring
in a single book have this measure. Purple suggestions have a confidence level
between 0.1 and 0.54, and the red suggestions are between 0.02 and 0.1.

4 User Study

4.1 Aim and Settings

Our user study aims to determine the extent to which the SST could be used at
the KB. We are also interested in users suggestions for improving the tool, or
applying it in alternative ways.

We gathered six indexers of the deposit cataloguing team (out of a total 16).
They were all trained indexers, with experience ranging between 10 and 30
yearsfive of them having at least 20 years experience.

The tests were originally planned for a period of three weeks, but this was
lengthened to 6 weeks after it appeared that too little suitable material could
be gathered in that time span.5 In total, 284 books were evaluated.

The evaluation task was seamlessly integrated in the daily work of the eval-
uators. As, when describing books with WinIBW, they recognized a book for
which Brinkman suggestions could be done, they activated the tool, and then
resumed to their normal tasks after that book had been indexed.

As already described, the SST interface required the evaluators to select which
were the correct suggestions, or complete these with non-suggested concepts
when required. It was also equipped with radio buttons with which evaluators
could indicate their level of satisfaction, and a free-text field where they could
enter their comments on the suggestions for the book at hand.

Before the test, the evaluators were given in a group briefing on the task and
SSTs features. We also gave each of them a questionnaire to fill at the end of
the test periodsee Appendix. After the test period, we organized a (group)
evaluation interview. There, the evaluators where given an extra question list
we devised after analyzing the input from the first questionnaire, so as to get

5 Currently, KB indexes books very shortly after their publication; the number of
books indexed by Biblion before being indexed by KB turned thus to be smaller
than we hoped. Luckily, our committed evaluators pretty soon decided themselves
to collect all suitable books from their entire department, beyond the ones attributed
to them via the normal KB process.

A. Isaac et al.

more precise (and quantitative) feedback on specific pointssee Appendix. The
list also provided a sound structure to guide the interview, during which the
evaluators had to answer it.

4.2 Suggestion Performance

Using the correct indexing selected or added by the evaluators, we could measure
the performance of our concept suggestions in terms of precision and recall. The
284 books evaluated were together given 4,021 Brinkman subject suggestions,
for a total 468 correct concepts. Table 2 gives the results for each of the three
suggestion classes mentioned in Sec. 3, where the non suggested category lists
the number of individual concept indices that could not be found by the system
and had to be added by indexers.

Table 2. Suggestion performance

Suggestion class # suggestions # correct precision recall
72.7% 47.9%
10.7% 27.1%
1.11% 5.98%
19.0%

1,188
2,525
?

?

?
blue
purple

red

non suggested

Looking at the blue row, we achieve a recall of 47.9% with a precision
of 72.7%. Taking the blue, purple and red suggestion results together, we can
achieve a recall of 81% if we accept a much lower precision of one in ten correct
suggestions (9.4%).

These results confirm our expectations regarding the categorization of suggestions in terms of precision classes. Interestingly enough, they are also consistent
with the results of the automatic evaluation over the testing set, mentioned in
Sec. 3.4see Appendix.

4.3 User Feedback

User Satisfaction. We evaluated the more subjective aspect of user satisfaction
based on the following sources:

 the general satisfaction level given to each books suggestions;
 the comments given for each book;
 the answers given to the first and second questionnaires;
 the informal feedback obtained during the group interview.

At the level of books, the satisfaction level seemed first relatively high. Out of the
264 books for which this information was filled, 193 were given a ++ or a +,
the two best marks available out of five. However, this positive appreciation does
not correlate with the perceived global usefulness of the tool, as it emerged from
latter comments and questionnaires. Indeed, when asked if they would continue
using the tool as it is , only two evaluators answered positively.
?

?

?
A first source of complaints is the robustness of the tool: the vocabulary
service hosted in Amsterdam crashed a couple of times. But the evaluators could
abstract from this, and they generally appreciated the functionality and the
design by the prototype.

Rather, the most important issue was clearly the perceived quality of individual concept suggestions: the tool did not hinder evaluators work, yet they
expected more accurate suggestions. The current prototype displays quite many
concepts, many of which were considered useless. At low confidence levels, suggestions can be based on just a insignificant overlap that is not meaningful from
an indexing perspective, as for Cross-culturele psychologie (cross-cultural psy-
chology) and  groepsdynamica (group dynamics). While including them still
brings some correct suggestions, the serendipity effect we wanted to test was
not considered as an advantage, in such a controlled indexing process. The basic
ranking of suggestions, based on their confidence level and expressed by the color
distinctions, was judged a very positive feature. Yet evaluators still felt they were
compelled to examine all suggestions, even the least certain ones. This suggests
finer strategies have to be devised concerning the way suggestions are presented
to the user, depending on their confidence level. A higher confidence threshold
might therefore be required for a suggestion to be displayed among the first
choices.

Our prototype also suggests that better suggestions could (and should) be
obtained, in absolute. The way suggestions are obtained is indeed judged very
promising, as testified by reactions collected on individual suggestions. Suggesting new indexing based on previous ones often successfully managed to bridge
the indexing gap between the two collections at hand, e.g., for Perzische taal
(Persian language) and Iraanse taal- en letterkunde (Iranian language and lit-
erature). In fact in some cases it provided with suggestions which evaluators
would not have anticipated, but that turned out to be correct.

Feedback for Improvement. As a token of interest, the evaluators strongly
suggested to have the same approach applied to other situations, i.e., not only
books indexed with Biblion. They hinted that the tool could also exploit metadata fields like the ones using the aforementioned NUR or other elements of
Fig. 1, such as the two lists of Persons as subjects and Corporations, which have
a strong connection with topical concepts. As a matter of fact, these extra sources
may be used in the first place to improve the performance of the Biblion-based
process, they confirmed us. Exploiting co-occurrences of a larger set of concepts
would allow to grasp some interesting patterns. But they might also be sufficient
to do useful suggestions when a Biblion concept is missing. Finally, showing their
awareness of the semantic connections between the different indexing systems
in their environmentand their potential valuethey suggested that concepts
from other vocabularies than Brinkman could be suggested. In particular, the
UNESCO classification, when it is not yet given for a book, would be a useful
and easy target to aim at. Other elements of Fig. 1 such as the two lists of
Persons as subjects and Corporations, would be valuable too.

A. Isaac et al.

In fact, as they felt that suggestion process was similar to the way they perform
indexing themselves, our evaluators also brought ideas to investigate in the longer
term, to make that similarity even higher. For instance, using negative rules
such as LTR:Zussen (sisters)  BTR:Zussen, unless KAR:roman is present;
or setting up a more interactive suggestion process that actualises the list of
suggested Brinkman concepts once a first one has been selected.

A last issue, which evaluators felt was clearly more urgent to tackle, is the
incompleteness of the data that is used for the suggestions and of the set of
concepts that can be suggested. In many cases, they expected more suggestions
to be made, considering the available metadata that could be used as a learning
setwhich they have rather extensive knowledge on. This can be explained by
our selecting only two thirds of the dually indexed books as a learning set. But
the original dump of records itself dates back to 2006, and is therefore relatively
obsolete. Similarly, the SKOS versions of the vocabularies which we exploit both
for the suggestion and the vocabulary services (esp. to allow users to search
for additional concepts using auto-completion) are mere snapshots. They were
already slightly outdated at the time of our experiment, which was detected
by indexers. Update mechanisms should be set up to exploit the most recent
data.

5 Conclusion

As regards our initial aims, the main results are:
 SW technology uptake: despite a few robustness issues that should be solved
in a next implementation phase, the main technical goals have been met.
Exploiting Semantic Web technologies, we could develop a prototype with
features both innovative and relevant from a domain perspective, and which
can be integrated into the KB production process.

 feasibility of the re-indexing approach: our evaluation showed strong interest from the book indexers. The quality of the suggestions must clearly be
improved before they start using such a tool. However, the prototype has validated the principle of using previous indexing to suggest new one, as well as
most of our design decisions. Further, the user study provided the development team with clear and feasible solutions to start improving on the current
prototype, wrt. both interface and suggestion quality.

An important point that motivates the adoption of SW solutions for the case at
hand is their genericity and flexibility. We could well have developed a prototype
with similar functionality, using more traditional techniques, on top of the same
collections and KOSs. In fact, some of the key benefits of SW solutions, such
as relying on unambiguous identifiers for resources, are already available for use
in the current application context. However, our technological choice guarantees
high flexibility while not requiring much additional implementation effortoff-
the-shelf RDF stores can be deployed easily and accessed by simple scripts using
SPARQL. Especially, the prototype can be adapted so as to use other metadata
?

?

?
(and their associated KOSs) to derive more precise suggestion rules, which is
one of the most important directions for future improvement.

As a matter of fact, our tool could be seamlessly deployed with completely
different collections and vocabularies, provided the associated metadata is also
made available in the appropriate RDF formatwhich was one of the bottlenecks
we identified as we proceeded with our own data conversion effort. Considering
the growing interest of CH institutions for Open Linked Data6 developments,
e.g., [16,17,18], one can be optimistic about it. For instance, as shown in Fig 1,
collections that are indexed by the subject heading lists of the American Library
of Congress and the French National Library (resp., LCSH and RAMEAU) overlap with the KB one. Our prototype could be extended to have KB benefit from
the work that is being done in these libraries. In that specific case we could
even seek to exploit existing semantic mappings between the two aforementioned
KOSs, which SW techniques made much easier to publish and access.7

Indeed, we believe that an important step has been made at the KB towards embracing the Open Linked Data vision. In the library domain, as in
many others, institutions will not adopt new technologies unless they have been
demonstrated with scenarios bringing clear value to them. Here, we have been
able to show that a library can benefit from having other libraries data being
accessible, even for a back-office, mission-specific process like indexing.

In turn, our prototype confirmed that there is value for KB making accessible its own data and vocabularies. If other institutes could benefit from KB
descriptions in their own metadata creation process as well, this would boost the
productivity of the entire network. In fact, as reflected in Fig. 1, this experiment
was also the opportunity to identify in a clearer way:

 from a technical perspective, the various vocabularies that can be connected

at the semantic level to enhance the indexing process;

 from a more institutional perspective, the collection holders that form together a neighbourhood of peers in the network, which can benefit from the
virtuous circle mentioned in the previous paragraph.

This may drastically enhance synergies, and make common adoption of these
new technologies an even more realistic perspective. Other institutes in the KB
neighbourhood, such as the Dutch association of public libraries, are actually
already considering moving to RDF and SKOS [19]. The time is now relatively
near, when a library cloud such as the one in Fig. 1 will lend itself to treatments
that allow the participating institutions to benefit from each others efforts.

Acknowledgements. This work is funded by the NWO CATCH and EU
eContentPlus programmes (STITCH and TELPlus projects). We are especially
grateful to the team of KB indexers who participated the evaluation and
provided crucial feedback.

http://linkeddata.org/

7 See http://id.loc.gov and http://stitch.cs.vu.nl/rameau

A. Isaac et al.
