Ontology-Driven Generalization of Cartographic 
Representations by Aggregation and Dimensional 

Collapse 

Eric B. Wolf 

Center of Excellence in GIScience 

US Geological Survey 
ebwolf@usgs.gov 

Abstract. Automatic generalization of cartographic features has been recognized 
as a goal of Geographic Information Science (GIScience). Many successful algorithms have been introduced for generalization tasks such as point reduction and 
smoothing  of  linear  features.  Such  algorithms  operate  well  as  a  function  of 
change in map scale or resolution. Other generalization tasks have proved considerably more difficult. Two of these operations, aggregation and dimensional 
collapse, are trivial to implement  replacing a set of points with an area feature 
or replacing an area feature with a single point  but have proven challenging to 
make  operational.  The  decision  to  aggregate  or  collapse  features  is  as  much  
dependent on the context of the features as they are change in map scale. This 
dissertation proposes to show how ontologies can be used to inform automated 
generalization in these operations. 

Keywords: ontologies, cartographic generalization, automated generalization. 

1   Problem Statement 

This dissertation proposes to link two significant areas of research: automated generalization  and  knowledge  engineering  with  ontologies.  Cartographic  generalization  is 
often split into two categories: feature modification based on geometry (e.g., sinuosity 
or  area-perimeter  ratios)  and  feature  modification  based  on  semantics.  This  study  
focuses on two generalization operations: aggregation and dimensional collapse. These 
two  operations  occur  in  response  to  constraints  which  can  be  measured  empirically. 
But as Bertin [2] noted, altering the dimensionality of representation  what he refers 
to as implantation  is more of a conceptual change. It is the goal of this dissertation to 
demonstrate  how  ontologies  can  be  used  to  constrain  or  enhance  the  conceptual 
changes during aggregation and dimensional collapse. 

The  intellectual  merit  of  this  effort  lies  in  the  application  of  current  knowledge  
engineering methods to automated generalization. Generalization is well-documented 
as  a  process  that  is  strongly  dependent  on  the  semantics  of  the  information  being 
modified. Ontologies have advanced knowledge in creating a means to encode such 
semantics in a form that is machine readable and that can guide automated processes. 
Efforts  have  been  made  to  encode  cartographic  rules  in  ontologies  [14]  [7].  Other 

A. Bernstein et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2009, LNCS 5823, pp. 990997, 2009. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 
?

?

?
efforts have involved applying semantic relationships as an input into generalization 
operations [8]. No known effort has been made to extend existing cartographic task 
ontologies specifically toward generalization. 

The  broader  impacts  of  this  study  lie  in  connecting  the  semantics  of  geographic  
information  with  the  generalization  process  in  a  manner  that  can  be  automated.  
National  Mapping  Agencies  (NMA),  such  as  the  United  States  Geological  Survey 
(USGS), Ordnance Survey of the United Kingdom or Institut Geographique National 
of  France,  currently  maintain  multiple  databases  representing  the  same  geographic 
extents  at  different  levels  of  detail.  The  ability  to  derive  all  levels  of  detail  from  a 
single database would result in significant cost savings and reduction in update errors. 
The  effort  will  directly  involve  the  research  goals  of  the  USGS  towards  future  
versions of The National Map. Specifically, the effort could bridge existing research 
projects in the USGS in generalization and ontology development.  

1.1   Generalization of Cartographic Representations 

Data collected for a database with a scale of 1:5,000 would be too detailed for a map at 
a scale of 1:100,000. A representation appropriate for 1:5,000 scale would need to be 
generalized to a representation appropriate at 1:100,000 scale. Cartographic generalization is the process in which data is transformed to better represent geographic phenomena that are most significant for the map purpose or scale.  Dimensional collapse and 
aggregation are related in that they alter the geometric dimensionality of the represen-
tations.  Dimensional  collapse  involves  reducing  the  geometric  dimensionality  of  a 
representation:  a  two-dimensional  polygon  representing  the  borders  of  a  city  at  fine 
scales may be replaced with a single zero-dimensional point symbol at coarser scales. 
Aggregation involves replacing collections of similar point symbols with a polygonal 
representation denoting a field of similar objects (Figure 1) [10]. These operations may 
be invoked due to constraints or for abstraction. Constraints are the limitations imposed 
by  the  communication  medium  (paper,  screen,  color  palette,  etc.)  and  human  
perception (semiotics) on how the abstracted data is communicated. Abstraction refers 
to the process in which the surveyor or data collector gather information and structure 
it according to demands of the desired end product. For instance, the location of wells, 
irrigation  ditches  and  land  parcels  might  be  collected  as  locations  and  areas  stored 
abstractly as points and polygons for the purpose of managing water rights [3]. 

Fig. 1. Aggregation and Collapse generalization operations [10] 

E.B. Wolf 

Bertin [2] divides cartographic generalization into two categories: structural generalization and conceptual generalization. Structural generalization involves geometric or 
symbolic changes to feature representation without impacting the semantic relationship 
with other features. Conceptual generalization requires not just symbolic or geometric 
changes, but a change in implantation [2]. A change in implantation means a change 
in representation from one primitive type, point, line or area, to another. Collapsing an 
area to a point or aggregating a collection of points into an area are examples of change 
in implantation [12].  Bertin provides the example of mines symbolized by points and 
then aggregated into an area symbol for a coal field. Structural generalization may 
alter the number of point symbols for mines but a conceptual generalization replaces 
the points entirely with an area symbol representing the coal field. 

Similarly, Ratajski [11] divides generalization into the quantitative and the qualita-
tive.  Quantitative  generalization  is  defined  as  a  gradual  reduction  of  map  contents 
depending  on  the  reduction  of  the  map  scale  whereas  qualitative  generalization  is 
given as turning from the more elementary ideas to the more general ones. Continuing with Bertins example, the application of quantitative generalization would result 
in a reduction of the number of mine symbols whereas the application of qualitative 
generalization would replace the concept of individual mines with a new concept of a 
coal field. 

Weibel  [16]  also  creates  a  binary  division  describing  generalization  operators  as  
either  context-independent  or  context-dependent.  Specifically,  the  generalization  
operators  selection/elimination,  simplification  and  smoothing  are  termed  contextindependent because they can be applied to individual feature representations without 
respect  to  surrounding  features.  Aggregation  and  displacement  are  examples  of  
context-dependent operators that are only used when the surrounding spatial context 
necessitates it. 

Mackaness  [9]  states  ultimately  the  results  of  generalisation  do  manifest  themselves through the manipulation of geometric primitives. But current thinking argues 
that the reasoning behind those manipulations needs to be based on the analysis of the 
context. Thus, structural or quantitative generalization can be automated through the 
application  of  computational  geometry  but  conceptual  or  qualitative  generalization 
requires a context-oriented, semantic approach.  

Dutton  and  Edwardes  [4]  declare  semantic  properties  and  relations  needed  for 
generalization  that  cannot  be  inferred  from  geometry  must  be  coded  explicitly.  In 
other  words, the  semantic relationships that  govern  generalization cannot always be 
determined through mathematical manipulation of the representations. These semantic 
relationships must be explicitly established. Further, in order to automate the generalization process the relationships must be encoded in a machine-readable format.  

1.2   Ontologies for Cartographic Generalization 

According  to  Smith  [13],  in  the  philosophical  sense,  ontology  is  the  branch  of  
metaphysics  that  seeks  to  provide  a  definitive  and  exhaustive  classification  of  
entities in all spheres of being. In contrast to Smith, Gruber [5] defines an ontology 
as a formal, explicit specification of a conceptualization. In this definition, the term 
conceptualization  refers  to  a  model  of  some  phenomenon  constructed  through  the 
identification and enumeration of relevant concepts. The ontology should be explicit 
?

?

?
in  that  each  concept  and  constraints  on  its  use  should  be  clearly  delineated.  This  
explicit conceptualization should be encoded formally  that is, the ontology should 
be machine-readable. The term conceptualization appears similar to both a map and a 
spatial database. Both provide an abstract model of some phenomenon in the world 
and both, through cartographic or model generalization identify the relevant concepts 
of that phenomenon. In the case of a map, the conceptualization, or abstract model of 
some phenomenon in the world, is encoded in geometric shapes, patterns of color and 
texture. The kinds and categories in this abstract model are explicitly defined in the 
map  legend  but  the  constraints  on  their  use  are  only  loosely  defined  as  visual  
variables and cartographic guidelines.  But the conceptualization encoded as a map is 
not  formal  or  machine-readable  In  the  case  of  the  spatial  database,  the  data  model 
nicely  equates  to  the  abstract  model  of  some  phenomenon  in  the  world.  The  data 
model  of  a  spatial  database  is  also  explicit  and  formal.  The  data  model  explicitly  
defines the concepts used and the constraints on their use. These data models are also 
machine readable but generally machine readable by specific database systems. 

Grubers  definition  of  ontology  has  been  made  operational  through  formal  
languages like the Web Ontology Language OWL. By encoding conceptual relationships for a domain ontology in OWL, semantic relationships can be evaluated during 
automated  processing.  Automated  generalization  methods  can  use  these  linkages  to 
maintain the semantic character of representations while reducing detail [15].  

The application of ontologies to generalization and even the use of ontologies is 
not a new concept. Andrienko and Andrienko [1] develop what they term the first 
system  on  automated  mapping  considering  semantic  relationships  among  data  
components. Their Descartes system automatically creates thematic maps based on 
semantic  relationships  of  demographic  statistics.  Kulik  et  al.  [8]  present  a  novel 
algorithm for simplification of linear features that takes into account map purpose as 
encoded in the semantic weights. Other efforts focus on developing domain ontologies to facilitate cartographic generalization and representation in spatial databases. 
Dutton and Edwardes [4] state that ...without accounting for the roles of features in 
a landscape and in a map, it is difficult to select, simplify, displace and re-symbolize 
features  appropriately.    They  develop  an  ontology  based  on  the  place  names  of 
features common between USGS topographic maps and NOAA navigational charts.  
Torres  et  al.  [14]  describe  domain  ontologies  for  hydrological  and  topographic 
maps. The goal of their exercise is to explore representations of these maps as ontolo-
gies.  Iosifesci-Enescu  and  Hurni  [7]  introduce  ontologies  for  the  formalization  of 
cartographic  knowledge  and  rules.  They  demonstrate  both  a  cartographic  domain 
ontology centered on concepts of map, graphic element, visual variable and symbol 
and point towards a task ontology that formalizes the storage, access and exchange 
cartographic rules.   

This dissertation will attempt tasks to help inform how semantic relationships drive 
the  generalization  operations  of  aggregation  and  dimensional  collapse.  While  these 
operations  are  typically  employed  to  maintain  the  presence  of  a  feature  representations in response to reduction in map scale, they are sometimes employed in response 
to changes in context according to the purpose of the map [4]. 

E.B. Wolf 

2   Research Questions 

The questions this dissertation addresses are: 

1. Can the semantic relationships encoded as ontologies be used to automate dimen-

sional collapse and aggregation? 

2. Separate  domain  ontologies  must  be  created  for  each  separate  map  series.  Can  a 
single task ontology for generalization be created to manage the semantics for all 
map scales? How is generalization modeled inside this ontology? 

3. If  multiple  ontologies  must  be  created,  how  can  the  ontologies  be  aligned  to  

represent continuity across levels of detail?  

3   Workplan 

As a demonstration of the concepts in this dissertation, application ontologies will be 
developed for air navigation charts similar to the domain ontologies created by Torres 
et al. [14]. Air navigation charts are ideal for this case study because the database and 
scale remain fixed while representation is varied. The charts represent essentially the 
same information but with two unique perspectives. Visual Flight Rules (VFR) charts 
are  designed  for  conditions  in  which  pilots  can  navigate  by  visually  surveying  the 
landscape. Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) charts are designed for conditions in which 
pilots must rely solely on instrument readouts (Figure 2).  

 

 

Fig.  2.  Section  of  IFR  and  VFR  Charts  over  Jefferson  County  Airport.  Two  cartographic  
ontologies based on one spatial database model. 

Once  the  demonstration  ontologies  are  completed,  cartographic  application  ontologies will be created for multi-scale map series produced by the USGS (Figure 3). 
To  limit  the  scope  of  the  study,  focus  will  be  on  feature  complexes  in  and  around 
selected international airports. A single ontology will be created for each multi-scale 
map series by examining the official data dictionaries. The availability of the official 
data  dictionaries  may  further  limit  the  scope  of  this  task.  A  significant  question 
arises from this process: Is it better to have one ontology that manages generalization 
and  change  in  scale  internally?  Or  is  it  better  to  have  multiple  ontologies  with  the 
generalization process becoming a process of creating semantic agreements between 
the ontologies? 

 
?

?

?
Fig. 3. San Francisco International Airport in USGS Topographic multi-scale map series. Left 
to right 1:24,000 7.5 Quandrangle, 1:100,000 30 x 60 Quadrangle, and 1:250,000 1 degree 
by 2 degree Quadrangle, presented as uniform-scale graphics.  

Finally,  task  ontologies  will  be  constructed  for  cartographic  generalization  operations  used  in  each  application  ontology.  Relationships  among  the  domain  ontologies 
developed  in  this  study  will  be  established.  For  instance,  a  domain  ontology  for  the 
spatial databases underlying the USGS National Map could be aligned with different 
cartographic  domain  ontologies.  The  same  will  be  done  for  the  generalization  task 
ontologies.  Theoretically, such a system will allow for the generation of ontologicallydissimilar maps like the IFR and VFR charts as well as guiding the generalization of 
data for multi-scale map series.  

In the first half of this research project, a series of domain and task ontologies are 
to be developed for creating similar maps. Several iterations of each ontology may be 
necessary  to  balance  the  requirements  of  each  criterion.  Gruber  [6]  gives  objective 
criteria  for  evaluating  the  design  of  formal  ontologies.  The  ontologies  developed  in 
this dissertation will be evaluated against these criteria 

The demonstration task involves the flight navigation charts controls for scale and 
underlying database while varying map purpose. It is anticipated that a single domain 
ontology may be constructed for both VFR and IFR perspectives. Also, a task ontology  for  cartographic  representation  would  be  created  based  on  a  subset  of  the  
cartographic rules used on the flight navigation charts similar to Iosifescu-Enescu and 
Hurnis  ontology  [7].  The  differences  in  the  perspectives  would  be  encoded  in  two 
application ontologies based on these domain and task ontologies. 

The  main  research  effort  involves  creating  ontologies  for  multi-scale  map  series. 
This  effort  will  be  considerably  more  challenging  than  the  demonstration,  not  just 
because of the number of maps involved, but because at least two different models are 
possible.  In  both  models,  it  is  anticipated  that  a  single  domain  ontology  will  be 
needed for each map series.  The cartographic task ontology  from the demonstration 
would  be  expanded  to  include  generalization  operators.  Task  ontologies  encode  
relationships among tasks but not specific sequences. Application ontologies rely on 
these relationships by the tasks to concepts in the domain ontology. Thus, application 
ontologies  would  be  created  for  either  each  map  or  each  map  series  depending  on 
whether or not a single application ontology can be created for an entire map series. 

Once completed, the  final effort  would be to utilize the hierarchy of domain and 
task ontologies to explore relationships between scale and ontology in order to answer 
the research questions. One method of exploring these relationships would be to map 
the successful ontologies onto heterogeneous database ontologies for the purpose of 

E.B. Wolf 

guiding  the  generalization  process.  The  overall  goal  of  the  project  is  to  guide  the  
conceptual  generalization  of  geographic  representations  through  the  semantic  
relationships encoded in the ontologies. In order to evaluate this goal, it will be necessary  to  develop  programs  that  utilize  ontologies  in  automating  the  generalization 
process. 

4   Summary  

This dissertation is designed to demonstrate how ontologies can be used to constrain 
or  enhance  the  conceptual  changes  during  aggregation  and  dimensional  collapse. 
These two generalization operations modify the conceptual nature of representations 
and must be guided by semantics, not geometry [11] [2] [16] [9].  

The  expected  outcomes  of  this  research  are  the  creation  of  a  series  of  domain  
ontologies  from  data  dictionaries  published  by  NMAs  as  well  as  one  or  more  
task ontologies which model generalization within the context of cartography. These 
ontologies will be aligned as application ontologies that will be coupled with scripts 
to drive automated generalization for dimensional collapse and aggregation.  

Acknowledgments.  This  research  was  supported  by  the  United  States  Geological 
Survey as part of the project titled Building an Ontology for The National Map.  
