 

Exploring Scholarly Data with Rexplore 

Francesco Osborne1,2, Enrico Motta1, and Paul Mulholland1 

1 Knowledge Media Institute, The Open University, MK7 6AA, Milton Keynes, UK  

{francesco.osborne,enrico.motta,paul.mulholland}@open.ac.uk 

2 Dept. of Computer Science, University of Torino, 10149 Torino, Italy  

osborne@di.unito.it  

Abstract. Despite the large number and variety of tools and services available 
today  for  exploring  scholarly  data,  current  support  is  still  very  limited  in  the 
context of sensemaking tasks, which go beyond standard search and ranking of 
authors and publications, and focus instead on i) understanding the dynamics of 
research  areas,  ii)  relating  authors  semantically  (e.g.,  in  terms  of  common 
interests  or  shared  academic  trajectories),  or  iii)  performing  fine-grained 
academic expert search along multiple dimensions. To address this gap we have 
developed a novel tool, Rexplore, which integrates statistical analysis, semantic 
technologies, and visual analytics to provide effective support for exploring and 
making sense of scholarly data. Here, we describe the main innovative elements 
of the tool and we present the results from a task-centric empirical evaluation, 
which  shows  that  Rexplore  is  highly  effective  at  providing  support  for  the 
aforementioned  sensemaking  tasks.  In  addition,  these  results  are  robust  both 
with respect to the background of the users (i.e., expert analysts vs. ordinary 
users) and also with respect to whether the tasks are selected by the evaluators 
or proposed by the users themselves. 

Keywords:  Scholarly  Data,  Visual  Analytics,  Data  Exploration,  Empirical 
Evaluation, Ontology Population, Data Mining, Data Integration.  

Introduction 

Understanding what goes on in a research area is no easy task. Typically, for a given 
topic, this sensemaking process may require exploring information about a variety of 
entities, such as publications, publication venues, researchers, research groups, events, 
and others, as well as understanding the relationships which exist between them. Such 
exploration and sensemaking tasks can take place in a variety of contexts, involving 
different categories of users. For instance, one of the authors of this paper is Editor-
in-Chief  of  a  scientific  journal  and  in  such  a  role  he  regularly  needs  to  consider 
competing proposals for special issues, a task which requires (among other things) to 
analyze the dynamics of one or multiple research areas, in order to formulate a view 
on whether the proposals in question concern areas that are hot and growing, or are 
instead  to  a  lesser  extent  at  the  cutting  edge.  In  other  task  contexts,  such  scholarly 
data are also of great interest to research managers, funding bodies and government 
agencies, who i) may want to find out about the performance of specific individuals 
and  groups,  and  compare  them  with  their  peers  both  at  national  and  international 
level;  or  ii)  may  need  to  gather  objective  evidence  about  research  trends  to  inform 
funding policy decisions.  

H. Alani et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2013, Part I, LNCS 8218, pp. 460477, 2013. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
?

?

?
Obviously,  there  are  many  tools  and  services  currently  available,  which  already 
provide a wide variety of functionalities to support the exploration of scholarly data 
see Section 2.1 for a review of the state of the art. Nevertheless, as Dunne et al. point 
out [1], there is still a need for an integrated solution, where the different scholarly 
tasks  are  provided  in  a  coherent  manner,  through  an  environment  able  to  support  a 
seamless  navigation  between  different  views  and  functionalities.  In  addition,  as 
discussed  in  detail  in  the  next  section,  we  believe  that  there  are  also  a  number  of 
important  functionalities,  which  are  crucial  to  providing  effective  support  for 
exploring and making sense of scholarly data, but are currently missing from existing 
solutions. These include (but are not limited to) the ability i) to investigate research 
trends effectively at different levels of granularity, ii) to relate authors semantically 
(e.g.,  in  terms  of  common  interests  or  shared  academic  trajectories),  and  iii)  to 
perform fine-grained academic expert search along multiple dimensions.  

To address this gap we have developed a novel tool, Rexplore [2], which integrates 
statistical  analysis,  semantic  technologies,  and  visual  analytics  to  provide  effective 
support for exploring and making sense of scholarly data. In this paper, we illustrate 
the main innovative elements of the tool and we also present the results from a taskcentric  empirical  evaluation,  which  shows  that  Rexplore  is  highly  effective  at 
providing support for the aforementioned sensemaking tasks. In addition, these results 
are robust both  with respect to the background of the users (i.e., expert analysts vs. 
ordinary  users)  and  also  with  respect  to  whether  the  tasks  are  selected  by  the 
evaluators or proposed by the users themselves. 

Exploring Scholarly Data 

2.1 

State of the Art 

A  large  variety  of  systems  support  the  exploration  of  scholarly  data,  some  of  them 
providing an interface to a specific repository of bibliographic data, others integrating 
multiple  data  sources  to  provide  access  to  a  richer  set  of  data  and/or  to  provide  a 
richer set of functionalities. The most widely used academic search engine is probably 
Google  Scholar  (http://scholar.google.com),  which  primarily  supports  search  and 
citation  services,  providing  comprehensive  access  to  the  academic  literature.  DBLP 
(http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/~ley/db/)  is  a  well-known  computer  science 
bibliography website and can be browsed using FacetedDBLP [3], an interface which 
exploits the faceted search paradigm to support data exploration. CiteSeerX [4] focuses 
instead  on  large-scale  harvesting  and  indexing  of  research  papers  and  includes 
mechanisms for suggesting relevant papers. These systems mainly focus on providing 
a good interface for publication search and are not designed to support sensemaking 
tasks  in  the  academic  domain.  On  the  contrary,  Microsoft  Academic  Search 
(http://academic.research.microsoft.com/)  provides  a  variety  of  visualizations, 
including co-authorship graphs, publication trends, and co-authorship paths between 
authors.  In  a  similar  way  Arnetminer  [5]  also  offers  different  visualizations  and 
provides support for expert search and trend analysis. Saffron [6], which builds on the 
Semantic  Web  Dog  Food  Corpus  [7],  exploits  keywords  for  expert  search  and 
estimates the strength of an author/topic relationship by analyzing co-occurrences on 
the Web. A common aspect of these systems is that they use keywords extracted from 

F. Osborne, E. Motta, and P. Mulholland 

publications as proxies for research topics. However these are noisy and lack structure 
(see Section 2.2.1 for a detailed discussion on this aspect). 

Recently, reference management tools have emerged, such as Zotero (http://www. 
zotero.org),  EndNote  (http://endnote.com)  and  Mendeley  (http://www.mendeley. 
com), as well as specialized social networks sites for researchers e.g., ResearchGate 
(http://www.researchgate.net) 
(http://www.academia.edu). 
However,  while  these  systems  support  exploration  to  some  degree,  again  they  only 
provide limited support for sensemaking tasks.  

and  Accademia.edu 

A  key  challenge  for  a  system  exploring  scholarly  data  is  how  to  assist  users  in 
searching  and  navigating  through  a  variety  of  different  dimensions  e.g.,  topic, 
organization, co-author, etc. A popular paradigm is faceted browsing [8], in which a set 
of objects can be filtered progressively along several dimensions in different orders. The 
\facet  tool  [9]  exploits  this  idea  to  allow  for  an  easier  exploration  of  heterogeneous 
Semantic Web repositories by using the different resources found in RDF repositories as 
alternative  facets.  mSpace  [10]  tackles  the  problem  of  dealing  with  high-dimensional 
spaces, by showing a subset of the data at the time, called a slice, and arranging them 
in a hierarchy of columns in accordance with user-defined priorities. Other approaches 
rely  on  the  pivot  (or  multi-pivot)  paradigm  [11],  which  allows  users  to  identify  key 
elements in the data space (the pivots), and use these to introduce structure and facilitate 
the  navigation  process.  For  example,  PaperCUBE  [12]  offers  advanced  data 
visualization  functionalities  and  it  specifically  focuses  on  scholarly  data,  providing 
effective  visual  modalities  to  browse  citation  networks  and  relations  between  authors 
and  to  situate  a  paper  in  a  research  context.  However,  the  focus  here  is  primarily  on 
individual  publications  and  little  support  is  provided  for  higher-level  tasks,  such  as 
understanding research dynamics and fine-grained expert search.  

2.2  Gap Analysis 

As we have seen in the previous section, the space of solutions for exploring scholarly 
data is large, comprising both powerful systems for crawling and indexing scholarly 
data, such as Google Scholar, as well as a variety of visualization solutions and data 
exploration  paradigms,  some  generic  in  nature,  others  specifically  customized  for 
scholarly  data.    However,  despite  the  availability  of  such  a  variety  of  systems, 
exploring  scholarly  data  remains  challenging,  especially  once  we  move  away  from 
basic search (for authors or publications) and we aim to capture the dynamic elements 
to  do  with  research  trends  and  relationships  between  authors  (which  go  beyond 
citation and collaboration), or we aim to perform expert search at a very fine-grained 
level e.g., by searching for researchers with expertise in multiple topics, at a certain 
career stage, within a certain geographical area, who have a track record of publishing 
in  the  top  conferences  associated  with  one  or  multiple  research  areas,  etc.  In  what 
follows  we  will  discuss  these  issues  in  more  detail,  highlighting  the  key  gaps  that 
Rexplore aims to address. 

No Semantic Characterization of Research Areas 

2.2.1 
A  key  precondition  for  an  effective  exploration  of  scholarly  data  concerns  the 
mapping of people and publications to the relevant research areas. However, research 

 
?

?

?
area is rarely treated as a first class concept and instead systems tend to use keywords 
as  proxies  for  research  areas.  This  limitation  creates  a  number  of  problems.  For 
instance, the Arnetminer page for Enrico Motta includes International Semantic Web 
Conference  as  a  research  interest,  even  though  research  interests  should  arguably 
concern topics1, rather than conferences.  A similar problem can be seen by looking at 
the Microsoft Academic Search (MAS) page for Enrico Motta, which lists three high 
level  fields  for  him,  Database,  Web,  and  Artificial  Intelligence,  and  then 
supplements  this  information  with  a  number  of  keywords,  including  Case  Study, 
which (again) is arguably not a research area. 

taxonomies,  such  as 

Another  problem  stemming  from  a  syntactic,  rather  than  semantic,  treatment  of 
research areas is that systems do not take  into account important semantic relations 
between research areas, such as an area being a sub-area of another one, or two labels 
referring to the same research area. This problem has been traditionally addressed by 
relying  on  manually  curated 
the  ACM  classification 
(http://www.acm.org/about/class/). However these classifications suffer from  several 
problems. First of all, they are very shallow for example the entry Intelligent Web 
Services and Semantic Web in the ACM classification only contains four sub-topics, 
thus  failing  to  reflect  the  variety  of  topics  being  tackled  by  the  Semantic  Web 
research community. In addition, because they are manually curated, they evolve very 
slowly and as a result, they fail to reflect the latest research trends. Finally, they are 
actually very opaque, as it is not clear what does it mean for a topic to be classified 
under  another  topic.  For  instance,  Ontology  Languages  is  classified  under 
Intelligent  Web  Services  and  Semantic  Web;  however  one  could  argue  that  it  is 
strange  to  say  that  the  former  is  a  sub-topic  of  the  latter,  given  that  ontology 
languages  were  being  designed  well  before  the  Semantic  Web  was  recognized  as  a 
research area. In addition, these classifications do not cater for situations where there 
are different  ways to refer to the same area. For instance,  most people  would agree 
that the labels Ontology Matching and Ontology Alignment refer to the same area 
of research.   

2.2.2   Lack of Granular Analysis 
Systems such as MAS provide ways to visualize research trends.  However, these are 
considered  at  a  very  high-level  of  abstraction.  For  example,  MAS  can  visualize 
publication  trends  in  World-Wide-Web  and  Databases,  but  cannot  provide  this 
feature  for  Semantic  Web,  let  alone  more  fine-grained  topics,  such  as  Semantic 
Web Services. However, both researchers and students tend to be interested in rather 
fine-grained  trends    e.g.,  whats  happening  with  Linked  Data,  rather  than  whats 
happening  with  the  Web.    A  wider  range  of  topics  is  provided  by  Arnetminer, 
however these still cover only a subset of the research topics (e.g., key topics for the 
Semantic Web community, such as Linked Data and Ontology Evolution are not 
included) and in addition they are provided as a flat list, rather than in a structured, 
easily navigable form. 

                                                           
1 In what follows, we will use the terms topic and research area interchangeably. 

F. Osborne, E. Motta, and P. Mulholland 

2.2.3   Digital Library Bias 
Another limitation of most existing systems in the context of the sensemaking tasks 
that we wish to support is the emphasis on classic digital library functionalities, such 
as supporting search for publications and providing citation services. While of course 
these are key functionalities and essential building blocks for more advanced services, 
they  do  not  necessarily  provide  the  right  level  of  support when  the  goal  is  to  make 
sense of what goes on in a research area, rather than to identify a specific paper. For 
instance,  in  the  example  given  in  Section  1,  where  a  research  area  needs  to  be 
investigated in the context of making a decision about a special issue proposal, what 
is needed  from a  system is the ability to  support the  user in identifying quickly the 
important trends in the area such as, whether it is growing (and in this case where are 
the  new  researchers  coming  from)  or  shrinking  (and  in  this  case  where  are  the 
researchers  migrating  to),  rather  than  following  citation  links  or  locating  a  specific 
paper.  Another  negative  side-effect  of  this  bias  is  the  aforementioned  problem 
highlighted  by  Dunne  et  al.  [1],  concerning  the  lack  of  an  integrated  environment, 
supporting  a  seamless  exploration  of  the  space  of  scholarly  data,  as  opposed  to 
providing  atomic  functionalities,  to  do  with  static  visualizations  or  search  and 
citation services, which is the situation with most current systems.  

Overview of Rexplore 

The  goal  of  Rexplore  is  to  provide  an  environment  capable  of  overcoming  the 
limitations discussed in the previous section to support users effectively by enabling 
them  i)  to  detect  and  make  sense  of  the  important  trends  in  one  or  more  research 
areas,  ii)  to  identify  researchers  and  analyze  their  academic  trajectory  and 
performance  in  one  or  multiple  areas,  according  to  a  variety  of  fine-grained 
requirements,  iii)  to  discover  and  explore  a  variety  of  dynamic  relations  between 
researchers,  between  topics,  and  between  researchers  and  topics,  and  iv)  to  support 
ranking  of  specific  sets  of  authors,  generated  through  multi-dimensional  filters, 
according to various metrics. 

Rexplore  addresses  the  problem  of  the  lack  of  a  semantic  characterization  of 
research areas by introducing a fine-grained, automatically populated topic ontology, 
in  which  topics  are  identified  and  structured  according  to  a  number  of  semantic 
relationships [13]. The resulting knowledge base is generated using a combination of 
statistical methods and background knowledge on the basis of a large-scale corpus of 
publications  (Section  3.1)  and  is  then  augmented  with  geographic  information 
(Section  3.2).  Research  topics  can  then  be  browsed  and  analyzed  by  means  of  a 
variety of visual analytics solutions, which exploit the rich set of relations in the data, 
and  in  particular  the  fine-grained  characterization  of  research  areas  (Section  3.3). 
Authors can be investigated by plotting a number of metrics on a timeline, and their 
associated  research  areas  can  be  analyzed  at  different  levels  of  abstraction  (Section 
3.4).  Powerful  query/search  facilities  are  also  provided,  supporting  complex  multidimensional  queries  that  can  include  logical  connectives  (Section  3.5).  Finally, 
Rexplore also takes advantage of the fine-grained semantic characterization of authors 

 
?

?

?
co-
h  as 

and  topics,  to  introduce  no
authorship  and  focus  on  th
research interests and acade
As  shown  in  Figure  1, 
formats, including: DBpedi
API, GeoNames (http://ww
Google Scholar). The publi
the  system,  Rexplore  v2.0
generating the populated to
Scholar, EventSeer (http://e
and  the  standardization  of
GeoNames (see Section 3.
million  papers  and  2  millio
PHP,  while  the  interface  a
interface uses the Highchar
a heavily modified version 

ovel  relationships  between  authors,  which  go  beyond 
heir  similarity  with  respect  to  semantic  features,  such
emic trajectories (Section 3.6). 
Rexplore  integrates  a  variety  of  data  sources  in  differ
ia [14], DBLP++ (http://dblp.l3s.de/dblp.rdf.gz), the M
ww.geonames.org/), and parsed web pages (e.g., Wikipe
ication and author metadata used in the current version
,  come  mainly  from  MAS  and  DBLP++.  The  process
opic ontology exploits information collected from Goo
eventseer.net/) and Wikipedia. The geographic informat
f  the  affiliations  rely  on  information  from  DBpedia 
1). As of April 2013, Rexplore integrates metadata on
on  authors.  The  back-end  of  Rexplore  is  implemented
and  the  visualizations  are  in  HTML5  and  JavaScript.  T
rts (http://www.highcharts.com/) library, and also builds
of Jit (http://philogb.github.io/jit/). 

rent 

dia, 
n of 
s  of 
ogle 
tion 
and 
n 20 
d  in 
The 
s on 

Fig. 1. Rexplore Architecture 

 

3.1  Ontology Populatio

on with Klink 

Rexplore does not consider 
which characterizes research
populated and periodically u
corpus  of  publications,  an

topics as simple keywords, but relies on an OWL ontolo
h areas and their relationships. This ontology is automatic
updated by the Klink algorithm [13], which takes as inpu
nnotated  with  keywords  (these  can  be  user-defined 

ogy, 
cally 
ut a 
  or 

F. Osborne, E. Motta, and P. Mulholland 

automatically extracted from the text of a publication) and performs three key operations, 
using a combination of statistical methods and background knowledge: 

 It identifies research areas from the given set of keywords, tidying them up by 
fixing  errors  and  by  removing  keywords  that  do  not  denote  research  areas   
e.g., Case Study or NeOn Project. 
 It  automatically  computes  three  types  of  semantic  relationships  between 
research areas  see below for more details.  
 It returns a knowledge base of semantic relationships expressed in OWL. 

In particular, Klink computes the following three relationships between topics: 

 skos:broaderGeneric. This is used to indicate that a topic, say T1, is a sub-topic 
of  another  topic,  say  T2.  For  instance,  Semantic  Web  Services  can  be 
characterized as a sub-topic of both Semantic Web and Web Services. 
 contributesTo. This is defined as a sub-property of skos:related and it is used 
to  characterize  relations  where  there  is  evidence  (gathered  through  statistical 
methods and/or background knowledge) that research in topic T1 is seen as an 
important contribution to research in topic T2, but it would be incorrect to say 
that  T1  is  a  sub-topic  of  T2.    An  example  is  the  relation  between  Ontology 
Engineering  and  Semantic  Web,  where  there  is  significant  evidence  that 
results from the former are relevant to the latter, but it  would be incorrect to 
say that Ontology Engineering is a sub-topic of Semantic Web, given that 
it is a much older research area than Semantic Web and, even today, there is 
a lot of work in Ontology Engineering, which is carried out independently of 
Semantic Web research.  
 relatedEquivalent. This is also defined as a sub-property of skos:related and it 
is  used  to  indicate  that  two  keywords,  e.g.,  Ontology  Matching  and 
Ontology Alignment are simply different labels for the same research area2.  

Our  ontology3  builds  on  the  BIBO  ontology,  which  in  turn  builds  on  SKOS,4 
FOAF,5 and other standards. Our extensions are very conservative and comprise only 

                                                           
2  Here  we  could  have  used  Owl:sameAs,  given  that  Rexplore  functionally  treats  two 
relatedEquivalent topics as being the same one.  However, from an epistemological point of 
view,  it  can  be  argued  that  this  would  be  too  strong  a  commitment  and  that  in  other 
scenarios one may want to consider topics with different names as different ones. Hence, to 
avoid overcommitting our ontology, we have introduced the relatedEquivalent property.  

3  http://kmi.open.ac.uk/technologies/rexplore/ 
  ontologies/BiboExtension.owl. 
4  The  most  recent  specification  of 

found  at 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-skos-reference-20090818/, proposes a 
new property, skos:broaderTransitive, to support the representation of transitive hierarchical 
relations.  However, our ontology currently sticks to the older SKOS specification, primarily 
because it builds on the BIBO ontology, which in turn builds on the 2004 SKOS model. 

the  SKOS  model,  which  can  be 

5  http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/ 

 
?

?

?
the  relatedEquivalent  and  contributesTo  object  properties  described  earlier,  and  the 
class Topic, which is used to refer to research topics. The resulting OWL knowledge 
base  is  exploited  to  support  knowledge-based  exploration,  pattern  extraction  and 
author  clustering  in  Rexplore.  Currently  it  comprises  1500  topics  linked  by  almost 
3000 semantic relationships. A detailed description of Klink, including an empirical 
evaluation of the algorithm can be found in [13].  

3.2  Geographic Enrichment 

The data sources used by Rexplore offer in most cases only the name of the authors 
affiliation  (e.g.,  Universities,  Research  Labs,  Hospitals),  which  is  usually  derived 
from  parsing  research  papers  and  thus  it  is  simply  treated  as  a  string.  As  a  result, 
affiliations  may  in  some  cases  lack  the  actual  geographical  location  or  may  use 
different  ways  to  refer  to  the  same  institution  e.g.,  University  of  Turin  and 
University  of  Torino.  Since  a  correct  affiliation  linked  to  the  correct  geographic 
location provides  valuable information  for  filtering and exploring authors,  we  use a 
simple  but  effective  geographic  enrichment  procedure  which  i)  defines  a  standard 
name  for  each  affiliation,  avoiding  duplications,  and  ii)  maps  the  affiliation  to 
GeoNames,  a  well-known  geographic  database.  The  procedure  uses  initially 
Wikipedia to retrieve a  standard identifier  for the affiliation and then searches for 
the  location  associated  with  the  affiliation  in  DBpedia.  If  the  latter  search  is 
unsuccessful, then the Wikipedia page is parsed for the tag location from which city 
and country are extracted using a set of heuristic rules. After recovering information 
about the city or the country, the affiliation is mapped to the correct GeoNames ID. If 
the  search  for  affiliation  and/or  location  in  Wikipedia/DBpedia  fails,  then  the 
affiliation name is stripped of a set of typical terms, such as university, college or 
hospital, and the remaining string is searched for in the GeoNames database. This 
simple  method  provided  good  results,  allowing  us  to  correctly  map  disambiguated 
affiliations to GeoNames in about 85% of the cases. 

3.3  Topic Analysis 

Rexplore  takes  advantage  of  the  Klink-generated  OWL  knowledge  base  by 
considering every publication tagged with topic T1 to be also about topic T2, if T2 is 
broaderGeneric  than  T1,  or  relatedEquivalent  to  T1  (it  should  be  noted  that 
broaderGeneric is transitive). This has a dramatic effect on the quality and dimension 
of  data  available  for  each  topic:  for  example,  our  knowledge  base  includes  11,998 
publications tagged with the string Semantic Web, while the publications regarding 
the  topic Semantic Web (including sub-topics, such as Linked Data) are almost 
double (22,143).  

F. Osborne, E. Motta, and P. Mulholland 

Fig. 2. Exploring the topic Semantic Web in Rexplore  

 

For  analyzing  a  topic,  Rexplore  provides  an  interface  that  includes:  i)  general 
information about the topic, ii) access to the relevant authors and publications, iii) the 
topic navigator, iv) visual analytics on broaderGeneric and contributesTo sub-topics, 
and v) visual analytics on authors migration patterns from other topics to and from 
the topic in question. As an example, Figure 2 shows the page for the topic Semantic 
Web, which (on the left) includes basic statistics, access to basic functionalities, and 
the topic navigator showing the relevant fragment of the topic hierarchy generated by 
Klink.  On  the  right  hand  side  of  the  figure,  a  histogram  is  shown,  as  the  user  has 
selected  to  visualize  the  publication  trends  for  research  in  Linked  Data,  OWL  and 
RDF. In particular, Figure 2 shows that the Linked Data area has exploded in the past 
few years, while research in OWL appears to have reached a plateau. 

Rexplore is able to visualize different topic trends: 1) publication trends, 2) author 
trends and 3) migration trends. The first two are the number of publications or authors 
associated  with a semantically enriched topic on a timeline. The latter is defined as 
the number of estimated migrations between two topics and is computed by analyzing 
the shifting in authors interest, as described in [15]. 

3.4  Author Analysis 

Every  author  in  Rexplore  has  a  personal  page  which  includes  i)  general  bio 
information, ii) authors scores according to different bibliometric measures, iii) topic 
analysis,  iv)  co-author  analysis,  v)  pattern  analysis,  and  vi)  graph  view.  The  page 
offers the possibility of deploying more than 20 different charts to plot each metric as 
a  function  of  time.  The  topic  analysis  makes  it  possible  to  browse  and  plot  on  a 
timeline  the  main  research  areas  in  which  the  author  has  published  or  was  cited.  
The  topics  and  sub-topics  are  displayed  in  a  multilevel  list  in  such  a  way  that  it  is 
possible to choose the granularity level. For example it is possible to conduct a high  
 

 
?

?

?
level  analysis  by  focusing  on  the  main  topics  (e.g.,  Semantic  Web  or  Artificial 
Intelligence) or otherwise to zoom in one of them (e.g., Semantic Web) and further 
analyze its sub-topics in details, exploiting the semantic structure generated by Klink. 
The  co-author  analysis  section  ranks  the  co-authors  according  to  the  number  of 
publications or citations they have in common. It is also possible to select a number of 
co-authors and visualize their collaboration with the author in question by year and by 
topic. The pattern analysis section groups authors with a similar publications/citations 
pattern and can be also used to forecast future publication activity and impact for an 
author (in particular one at a reasonably early career stage). The graph view will be 
discussed in detail in Section 3.6.  

3.5 

Faceted Search and Data Browsing 

Rexplore offers a number of facets to be used both for the formulations of complex 
search  queries  and  for  context-based  data  navigation  and  analysis.  Indeed,  both  the 
topic  and  author  analysis  interfaces  offer  the  possibility  of  focusing  on  specific 
combinations of facets, in order to allow the users to navigate/retrieve data according 
to specific dimensions. For example, authors can be filtered by 1) name or a part of it, 
2) career range (that is the time from the first published work), 3) topics of interest 
and 4) venues in  which they published. Both venue and topic fields accept multiple 
values,  which  can  be  combined  using  logical  connectives.  Hence  it  is  easy  to 
formulate complex queries, e.g., to retrieve career-young authors, who have worked 
in both Semantic Web and Social Networks, and have published in ISWC. 

The results can be ranked by a variety of metrics that, for author-centric searches, 
include: 1) number of publications, 2) number of citations, 3) H-Index, 4) G-Index, 5) 
HT-Index, 6) GT-Index, 7) number of publications/citations in a topic or set of topics, 
8)  number  of  publications/citations  in  a  venue  or  set  of  venues.  Here  it  is  worth  to 
highlight that the fine-grained structure of research topics generated by Klink supports 
the  definition  of  fine-grained  impact  metrics,  such  as  citations  in  topics,  which 
allow to measure very specific elements of academic impact. 

HT-Index and GT-Index are based on the standard G-Index and H-Index, however 
they are normalized by the number of average citations in each topic. Hence they are 
useful  for  comparing  authors  who  publish  in  fields  with  different  levels  of  fieldspecific impact.  

Often  users  want  to  start  the  data  exploration  process  from  the  query  results,  for 
example by analyzing each one of a number of authors. Rexplore assists this seamless 
navigation by remembering the specified search filters e.g., when switching from a 
list of results to a graph view.  

3.6  The Graph View 

The graph view is a novel, highly interactive tool to explore the space of authors and 
their relationships using faceted filters. It takes as input one or multiple authors and  

F. Osborne, E. Motta, and P. Mulholland 

displays their relations allowing the user to choose among a variety of types of links, 
ranking  criteria,  and  filters.  As  an  example,  in  Figure  3  we  show  the  graph  view 
displaying the authors most similar to Enrico Motta according to the temporal topic 
similarity, a novel metric which reflects the similarity of people's research trajectories 
with respect to the temporal sequencing of their research interests. The radius of the 
nodes in the graph reflects the number of his/her publications in the Semantic Web 
area. Other author ranking measures, as discussed in the previous section, can also be 
used.  Users  can  also  choose  from  six  types  of  relations  between  authors:  co-
publication, co-citation, topic similarity, temporal topic similarity, publication pattern 
similarity and citation pattern similarity. 

Fig. 3. A graph view in Rexplore 

 

The  topic  similarity  reflects  how  similar  two  authors  are  with  respect  to  their 
research topics and takes advantage of  the fine-grained topic structure  generated by 
Klink  and  its  semantic  characterization.  A  naive  way  to  compute  it  would  be  to 
directly compare the vectors representing the number of publications associated with 
a keyword. However, treating topics as strings, as many systems do, would yield poor 
result. In fact, keywords referring to a related area, to a sub area, or even indicating 
the same topic with a different name would be considered different. For example, a 
prominent  author  in  the  field  of  Linked  Data  would  have  most  of  his  or  her 
publications  associated  to  a  Linked  Data  keyword,  and  may  be  considered 
uncorrelated to authors who have papers tagged as Semantic Web. Thus we exploit 
a variation of the semantic enrichment procedure already mentioned in Section 3.3 on 
the publication vectors of the authors, assigning each publication on a topic also to its 
broaderGeneric  or  relatedEquivalent  topics.  However,  in  this  case  we  want  also  to 
include contributesTo relationships, which yield important information but cannot be 
handled in the same way. In fact, it is not automatic that a paper published under a  
 

 
?

?

?
topic  (e.g.,  Ontology  Engineering) 
topics  
(e.g., Semantic Web). It seems however appropriate to use the probability that the 
contributing topic T1 refers to a certain topic T2 to assign an additional bonus to T2. 
Thus, in case of a contributesTo(T1,T2) relationship, we assign to T2 only a fraction of 
the publications in T1 according to the formula: 

its  contributesTo 

is  also  about 

(cid:1829)(cid:1846)((cid:1846)(cid:4667)(cid:3404)(cid:3533)(cid:1842)(cid:3435) (cid:1846)(cid:3627)(cid:1855)(cid:1872)((cid:1861),(cid:1846)(cid:4667)(cid:3439)(cid:3080)

 

(cid:3041)
(cid:3036)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)

where T is a topic, n is the number of publications of an author that are not already 
associated with T but have at least one topic in a contributesTo relationship with T, 

(cid:1855)(cid:1872)((cid:1861),(cid:1846)(cid:4667)  is  the  set  of  topics  associated  with  the  i-th  publication  that  are  in  a 
contributesTo relationship with T, (cid:1842)(cid:3435)(cid:1846)(cid:3627)(cid:1855)(cid:1872)((cid:1861),(cid:1846)(cid:4667)(cid:3439) is the probability for a paper with the 
set  of  topics (cid:1855)(cid:1872)((cid:1861),(cid:1846)(cid:4667)  to  be  also  explicitly  associated  with  area  T  (or  with  a  topic 

having  a  broaderGeneric  or  relatedEquivalent  relationship  with  T)  before  the 
publication date of the i-th paper and  is a factor which modulates the contributesTo 
relationship (empirically set to 0.5 in the prototype).  

By  taking  into  account  the  publication  date  of  each  paper,  the  formula  considers 
also the changes in topic relations over time. For example a paper about Ontology 
Engineering in the year 2001 would have a lower probability to be about Semantic 
Web than a paper about the same topic in 2010 and thus should contribute much less 
to  Semantic  Web  in  the  author  publication  vector.  The  topic  similarity  is  finally 
computed  as  the  cosine  similarity  between  the  semantically  enriched  vectors  of 
publications. 

The temporal topic similarity builds on the topic similarity measure and makes it 
possible to identify groups of researchers who appear to be following similar research 
trajectories,  sharing  research  interests  and  moving  from  one  topic  to  another  in  a 
similar way. In particular, this is very useful to identify the various sub-communities 
that  populate  a  particular  research  area.  The  temporal  topic  similarity  takes  into 
account  the  order  and  the  time  span  in  which  an  author  has  published  on  a  certain 
topic and is calculated as the weighted average of the topic similarities computed on 
different time intervals. Thus, if author A worked on T1 and then moved to T2, he or 
she  may  be  similar  to  author  B  who  was  originally  in  T2  and  then  moved  to  T1  in 
terms of topic similarity, but will be different in terms of temporal topic similarity. 

Finally, the publication/citation pattern similarity reflects how similar two authors 
are  with  respect  to  their  career  progression  in  terms  of  number  of  publications/ 
citations. 

The  graph  view  also  provides  a  variety  of  standard  interface  operations,  such  as 
changing the level of granularity in the view, expanding, closing, or hiding nodes, etc. 
In addition, both nodes and links can be filtered with respect to specific years, topics, 
and venues. For example, it is possible to customize a graph and visualize only the coauthors  of  a  particular  researcher,  who  have  between  5  and  15  career  years,  have 
published in both Linked Data and Social Networks, and have publications in CHI. 

F. Osborne, E. Motta, and P. Mulholland 

Empirical Evaluation 

4.1  Experimental Setup 

For  the  evaluation  we  enrolled  17  PhD  students  and  researchers  drawn  from  the 
members  of  the  Knowledge  Media  Institute  in  UK  and  the  University  of  Turin  in 
Italy. None of these subjects had been involved in the work on Rexplore, or indeed 
knew the  system prior to the evaluation session.  At the beginning of the evaluation 
session, every subject filled a questionnaire about his/her research experience, topics 
of interest, and familiarity with a list of systems that included Google Scholar (GS), 
MAS,  DBLP,  and  Citeseerx.  This  was  followed  by  a  15-minutes  tutorial  about 
Rexplore and then the subjects were asked to perform the activities listed in Table 1.  

Table 1. Activities in the Evaluation Process 

Activity 1. Carry out the tasks shown in Table 2 using Rexplore.  
Activity 2. Select one of the three tasks in Table 2 and attempt to achieve it using either 
Google Scholar (GS) or Microsoft Academic Search (MAS).  
Activity 3. Suggest a task you would consider valuable and perform it using Rexplore.  

Table 2. Evaluation Tasks 

Warm-up  Task.  Find  the  3  main  co-authors  (in  any  field)  of  the  author  with  most 
publications in the topic User Modelling. 
Task 1. Find the top 3 rising stars in the United Kingdom with expertise in both Semantic 
Web and Social Networks, in the career range 5-15 years from  first publication, ranked in 
terms of number of citations in these 2 areas. 
Task 2. Find the top 5 authors with the highest number of publications in the Semantic Web 
and rank them in terms of number of publications in Artificial Intelligence. For each of them 
find their most cited paper in Artificial Intelligence. 
Task 3. Which are the 2 sub-topics in Semantic Web that have grown the most in 2005-2010 
(as measured by the difference between the number of papers in 2010 and in 2005) and who 
are the top 2 authors (ranked by number of publications in topic) in these 2 topics. 
 
The rationale for selecting GS and MAS as control systems was that GS is the most 
widely used bibliographic search engine, while MAS provides a number of features, 
in terms of time-based visualizations, which go well beyond what is provided by GS.  
Each  task  was  recorded  with  screen  capturing  software  and  the  time  taken  for 
completion was measured; if a task was not solved within 15 minutes, it was recorded 
as failed.  Tasks not completed within the time limit were considered as 15 minutes 
performance. After completing the various tasks, the 17 participants were requested to 
fill  in  a  usability  SUS  questionnaire  [16]  and  a  second  questionnaire  about  the 
strengths/weaknesses  of  the  tested  systems.  On  average  the  total  time  required  to 
complete each evaluation session was slightly less than 2 hours. 

 
 

 
?

?

?
In  contrast  with  other  evaluation  studies  e.g.,  see  [17],  where  participants  were 
divided in different groups and each group would use a different tool to perform the 
same set of tasks, here we did not carry out a straightforward tool shootout, but we 
instead  implemented  a  more  faceted  experimental  design,  comprising  usability 
questionnaires and a task-centric evaluation, and also providing the participants with 
the opportunity both to suggest their own tasks and also to try out other tools.  The 
reason for this is that GS and MAS do not directly support the kinds of sensemaking 
tasks for which Rexplore offers support, hence a tool shootout would have provided 
little valuable data and most likely caused a high degree of frustration for the subjects. 
For  this  reason  we  decided  to  focus  the  bulk  of  the  evaluation  on  identifying 
opportunities to evaluate and gather feedback on Rexplore, while still collecting some 
comparative data.  

The tasks given to the subjects cover common scenarios to do with expert search 
and trend detection. Task 1 is a common expert search task e.g., for research leaders 
who wish to identify new blood to fill a certain position. Task 2 is also a common 
expert search task, where, given a pool of people with expertise in topic A, we want to 
identify  the  person  in  the  pool  that  can  be  considered  as  the  top  expert  in  topic  B. 
Task 3 is about detecting trends and analyzing research topics. It is a common task for 
many professionals, such as managers in research funding bodies, who may wish to 
identify which areas appear to be particularly hot within a broader research field.  

4.2  Results 

In Activity 1, the 17 subjects were able to complete within the requested 15 minutes 
50 of the 51 (17*3) tasks using Rexplore, with a 98% success rate. The only failure 
was registered in Task 2. Task 1 was the simplest one and was performed on average 
in about 3 minutes. In fact this task required only the ability to formulate a complex 
query, followed by the manual identification of a number of authors. Task 2 required 
a  more  complex  exploration  of  the  system,  since  the  user  had  to  first  select  five 
authors  and  then  explore  them  using  the  graph  view  or  the  author  analysis  page,  to 
find out their contributions in Artificial Intelligence.  Task 3 required the use of visual 
charts  showing  the  publication  trends  of  the  sub-topics  and  the  use  of  the  topic 
navigator to identify the best authors.   

Table  3.  Experimental  results  (in  min:secs)  using  Rexplore  and  MAS.  The  tasks  performed 
with GS yielded no success, thus their average time is by definition equal to 15:00. 

 
 

Rexplore (N=17) 

Task 1 

Task 2 

Task 3 

Average Time 
Standard Dev. 
Success Rate 

3:06 
0:45 
100% 

8:01 
2:50 
94% 

7:51 
2:32 
100% 

MAS (N=9) 

Task 1 
(N=6) 

14:46 
0:24 
33% 

Task 2 
(N=2) 
13:52 
1:35 
50% 

Task 3 
(N=1) 

15:00 
00:00 
0% 

F. Osborne, E. Motta, and P. Mulholland 

In  Activity  2,  eight  subjects  were  asked  to  work  with  GS  and  nine  with  MAS.  
Task  1  was  chosen  by  6  users  on  MAS  and  5  on  GS,  while  Task  2  was  chosen 
respectively by 2 and 3 subjects. Task 3 was perceived by the subjects as practically 
impossible to do with a system without a fine-grained topic analysis functionality, and 
as a result was tried only by one subject (using MAS). Only three people out of nine 
completed a task with MAS (overall 33% success rate) and none at all with Google 
Scholar. Hence, the success rates of the three systems are significantly different: the 
two by two table comparison between Rexplore and MAS analyzed with a Fisher test 
(a standard statistical significance test used in the analysis of contingency tables when 
the  numbers  involved  are  small)  yields  p=10-5,  whereas  the  three  by  two  table 
including also GS yields p <10-7.  Incidentally, the users who were able to complete 
the  chosen  task  on  MAS  (2/8  for  Task  1  and  1/2  for  Task  2)  were  among  the  best 
performers in Activity 1, and required for the same task about 5 times longer on MAS 
than  on  Rexplore,  even  after  having  already  successfully  completed  the  task  in 
Rexplore. Table 3 summarizes the time employed for the assigned tasks on Rexplore 
and MAS and the relative success rate i.e., the number of jobs completed correctly 
within 15 minutes.  

An  important  question  when  using  a  tool  for  navigating  a  research  area  is  how 
much  prior  knowledge  of  the  domain  affects  task  performance.  The  results  of  the 
evaluation show that the average time for completing the three tasks by subjects with 
expertise  in  Semantic  Web  (that  is  the  main  area  of  the  tasks)  is  not  significantly 
different  from  the  one  obtained  by  the  others  (p=0.63  according  to  the  t-test). 
However,  the  experts  in  tools  for  exploring  academic  data,  who  are  active  in  fields 
such as Bibliometric and Learning Analytics, were instead able to get acquainted with 
the  Rexplore  system  much  more  quickly  and  use  it  more  effectively  than  the  other 
subjects. The average time of the former group on the three tests was 5:010:02 min, 
against 6:52  0:06 min of the latter (p < 0.022). On the contrary, no correlation was 
found  with  the  usage  of  other  tools  for  academic  exploration,  such  as  GS,  MAS, 
DBLP, ACM, Citeseerx and Scopus. Hence the data appears to show that no domainspecific  expertise  is  needed  to  use  Rexplore  to  make  sense  of  a  particular  research 
area, while at the same time the tool does not penalize experts in Bibliometrics and 
Learning Analytics, who are used to carrying out these kinds of analyses.  

The  tasks  proposed  by  the  subjects  in  Activity  3  were  a  good  mix  of  routine 
searches and creative queries, and thus the performances cannot be directly compared. 
59%  of  the  subjects  chose  to  investigate  a  single  author,  using  mainly  the  topic 
analysis  and  the  graph  view,  whereas  23%  of  them  preferred  to  explore  a  research 
area  to  understand  better  its  migration  patterns  and  trends.  The  ability  to  filter  by 
multiple topics or using them for author analysis was widely appreciated: 71% of the 
proposed  tasks  involved  topic  filtering  or  topic  analysis  on  an  author  or  group  of 
authors.  The  integration  of  the  different  Rexplore  functions  made  it  possible  to  try 
particularly interesting exploration tasks: for example, a particularly creative subject 
tried  to  find  a  better  affiliation  for  an  author  by  analyzing  organizations,  topic 
similarity  and  prominence  of  the  researchers  connected  to  him  through  the  various 
links provided by Rexplore (incidentally, he opted for MIT).  

 
?

?

?
15 out of the 17 subjects considered their suggested task satisfactorily concluded. 
One of them was unable to complete her proposed task because of problems with the 
original data tagging: the subject was searching for papers of a certain author about 
Semantic Web, which were actually tagged only as Knowledge Base in the original 
data  which  Rexplore  uses.  This  suggests  that  relying  exclusively  on  user-defined 
keywords may not be sufficient and even when these are available, it may be useful to 
refine them by analyzing the abstract or the full text of the paper.  

Rexplore reached a  score of  75/100 on the  standard SUS  usability test, based on 
ten multiple-choice questions. A score of 75 can be converted to a percentile rank of 
72%,  meaning  that  the  usability  of  Rexplore  was  considered  equal  or  superior  than 
72% of the 500 tested systems. In particular 94% of the subjects agreed or strongly 
agreed on the fact that the functions of the system are well integrated and 82% stated 
that they would be happy to use Rexplore for their work.     

The  post-task  questionnaire  included  three  sections.  In  the  first  and  second  parts 
the  users  were  asked  for  their  opinions  about  the  support  given  by  Rexplore  and 
GS/MAS for the assigned tasks. In the third part they were asked to comment about 
the support provided by Rexplore for the task suggested by them.  

In  the  first  section,  94%  of  the  subjects  described  Rexplore  as  very  effective, 
while  18%  described  it  as  easy/natural/intuitive.  Among  the  most  useful  features 
were the faceted filters (59%), the visualization/charts (47%), the graph view (47%) 
and the semantic characterization of topics (41%). The main weaknesses of Rexplore 
were  found  to  be  its  visual  complexity  (41%)  and  a  not  always  well-evidenced 
navigation  context  (35%).  Indeed,  according  to  some  users,  the  high  number  of 
functionalities offered by Rexplore may also be overwhelming. 

When  asked  to  suggest  new  features  that  would  facilitate  their  exploration  of 
academic data, 23% of subjects suggested some minor interface change, especially 
in the direction of solving the aforementioned problem of making the context clearer 
in any  moment (18%). 23% of them thought Rexplore did not need any additional 
features and 18% proposed additional filters. Other features that the users suggested 
include a natural language interface for formulating complex searches and the ability 
to retrieve and search the full text of a publication from within Rexplore.  

Trying to perform the kind of task described in Table 2 with MAS or GS frustrated 
the users: 88% of the subjects using MAS and 89% using GS described the support of 
those  systems  as  ineffective.  The  reasons  of  their  frustration  were  various:  not 
effective  contextual  filtering  (77%  MAS,  65%GS),  absence  of  semantic/structured 
topics (56% MAS, 63%GS), and poor support for complex/multidimensional queries 
(33%  MAS,  50%  GS).  Finally,  the  support  provided  by  Rexplore  for  user-defined 
tasks  (Activity  3)  was  also  rated  positively.  76%  of  the  participants  defined  such 
support  as  effective/very  effective/unique,  while  12%  of  them,  though  they  were 
able to complete their task, found some minor problems, usually to do with missing 
filter options. Indeed it seems that users could do with a variety of filters well beyond 
what it is normally considered in these systems: one of the subjects suggested a filter 
able to discriminate genders, while another asked to be able to split publications by 
the particular author position (e.g., first or second author). Nonetheless the results of 
the evaluation appear very satisfactory, confirming that Rexplore provide a degree of 
support that users consider effective and valuable for performing real-world tasks.  

F. Osborne, E. Motta, and P. Mulholland 

Conclusions 

In this paper we have presented Rexplore, a novel tool for exploring scholarly data, 
which integrates a semantic foundation with statistical and visual analytics solutions 
to support users in exploring and making sense of scholarly data. The results from the 
empirical  evaluation  confirm  the  effectiveness  of  the  functionalities  provided  by  
the tool and show a high value of user satisfaction. In particular, users rate very highly 
the semantic underpinning of the tool, which arguably affords a major advantage over 
other tools in its ability to support i) the visualization of trends at a very fine level of 
granularity, ii) methods to identify semantic relations between authors, and iii) finegrained multi-dimensional academic expert search.  

For the future we plan to extend the tool by enhancing its functionalities through 
the integration of other sources of data relevant to academic activities and we also aim 
to address the minor interface issues identified during the evaluation. We also plan to 
add  to  the  number  of  navigation  filters,  a  feature  which  users  appear  to  value 
extremely  high.    Finally,  we  are  actively  discussing  with  a  number  of  commercial 
providers  of  scholarly  data,  with  the  aim  to  release  a  version  of  the  tool  with 
comprehensive data coverage for use by the scientific community.  
