Incorporating Commercial and Private

Data into an Open Linked Data Platform

for Drug Discovery

Carole Goble1, Alasdair J.G. Gray1, Lee Harland2, Karen Karapetyan3,

Antonis Loizou4, Ivan Mikhailov5, Yrj an a Rankka5, Stefan Senger6,
Valery Tkachenko3, Antony J. Williams3, and Egon L. Willighagen7

1 School of Computer Science, University of Manchester, UK

2 Connected Discovery, UK

3 Royal Society of Chemistry, UK

5 OpenLink Software, UK
6 GlaxoSmithKline, UK

4 Department of Computer Science, VU University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

7 Department of Bioinformatics - BiGCaT, Maastricht University, The Netherlands

Abstract. The Open PHACTS Discovery Platform aims to provide
an integrated information space to advance pharmacological research in
the area of drug discovery. Effective drug discovery requires comprehensive data coverage, i.e. integrating all available sources of pharmacology
data. While many relevant data sources are available on the linked open
data cloud, their content needs to be combined with that of commercial datasets and the licensing of these commercial datasets respected
when providing access to the data. Additionally, pharmaceutical companies have built up their own extensive private data collections that they
require to be included in their pharmacological dataspace. In this paper
we discuss the challenges of incorporating private and commercial data
into a linked dataspace: focusing on the modelling of these datasets and
their interlinking. We also present the graph-based access control mechanism that ensures commercial and private datasets are only available
to authorized users.

Introduction

Drug discovery requires integrating data from multiple sources about pharma-
cology: understanding the (malfunctioning) biological process or pathway that is
causing disease, identification of the target (protein) on that pathway which can
be manipulated without causing side effects, and finally identifying drugs (small
chemical compounds) that interact with that target in an attempt to restore the
normal biological behavior. Data on the interaction of a drug with a target is
key to drug design.

Much of the pre-competitive drug discovery data is available in open public
data repositories such as ChEMBL [9], ChemSpider [19], WikiPathways [15], and
UniProt [22]; although some impose restrictions for commercial use of the data,

H. Alani et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2013, Part II, LNCS 8219, pp. 6580, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

C. Goble et al.

e.g. BRENDA [20] and KEGG [18]. Effective drug discovery requires comprehensive coverage of the pharmacological space, i.e. the assembly of as many datasets
as possible [21]. Additionally, pharmaceutical companies have built up their own
private, commercial intellectual property about compounds, targets and their
interactions which they need to combine with the openly available data.

The Open PHACTS project1 is a public-private partnership aimed at addressing the problem of public domain data integration for both academia and major
pharmaceutical companies [26]. The key goal of the project is to support a variety of common tasks in drug discovery through a technology platform, the Open
PHACTS Discovery Platform2 [10] (Section 4), that will integrate pharmacological and other biomedical research data using open standards such as RDF. A
key driver of the project is to address concrete pharmacological research questions and integrate with the workflows and applications already used within the
drug discovery pipeline. A major requirement from the pharmaceutical companies is the ability to incorporate both commercial datasets for which they hold
licenses and their own private data. Thus there is a requirement to limit access
to datasets based on license restrictions and subscriptions as well as the users
credentials.

This paper presents:

 A discussion on the privacy issues around advertising the descriptions of
commercial and private datasets (Section 4.1) and the deposition of chemical
compounds into a registry and validation service (Section 4.2);

 The challenges of converting commercial and private datasets into linked

data and combining them into a linked data platform (Section 5);

 A graph-level approach to ensure privacy of private and commercial datasets

(Section 6.1), even when they are linked into the open data cloud.

2 Motivating Use Case and Requirements

The aim of any data integration system is to provide the user with a fuller
picture of a particular dataspace than is possible by any single dataset. Such
efforts are critical in pharmacology where the aim is to fully understand the
effects that one or more man-made chemical molecules may have on a biological
system. Such chemicals are very often designed to inhibit or activate one specific protein, yet in practice this is rarely the case. Indeed, most drugs exhibit
polypharmacology [6] whereby they interact and perturb multiple targets in
the body to different extents. The selection of a chemical for further study or
commercial development is directly influenced by these profiles, assessing the
risk that these unwanted effects may have on the outcome. Naturally, there have
been many attempts to produce models that predict polypharmacology based
on statistics generated from large pharmacology databases such as ChEMBL [9]
and PubChem [25]. Thus, access to as complete a dataset as is possible is critical

http://www.openphacts.org/ accessed July 2013.
https://dev.openphacts.org/ accessed July 2013.
?

?

?
at both the individual user level (exploring a particular chemical or target) and
to data mining efforts, such as those building predictive pharmacology models.
However, there is no one single database that holds all known pharmacology
data. Moreover, the public domain systems are also complementary to commercial pharmacology databases [21] which are essential resources for many drug
discovery companies. Recently, initiatives such as Pipeline Data Integrator3 by
Thompson Reuters have sought to close this gap by providing mechanisms to
incorporate internal and public data along side the providers resource. How-
ever, one might wish to integrate multiple commercial databases and/or other
biological and chemical data. Therefore, in the Open PHACTS project we have
undertaken a task to create a vendor-neutral, secure space whereby multiple
commercial vendor datasets can sit alongside public ones; with the commercial
data only accessible to authorised users, i.e. those who hold a license.

An immediate and critical question concerns whether such integration should
be achieved by combining datasets within one database (i.e. data warehousing),
or through web-services (i.e. federation). The Open PHACTS Discovery Platform supports both approaches. Copies of each dataset are cached into a single
database in order to provide interactive responses to queries that integrate the
data: the data is left in its original form. At the same time, operations such
as chemical similarity search are dispatched to specialist remote web services.
The nature of the queries which our users wish to perform are data intense and
require searches across multiple datasets. Results from one dataset may have an
affect on the data required from the other datasets in the system. For example,
if the user requests the top ten most frequent proteins for which this chemical is
active, a protein may only appear in this list given a suitable number of aggregated data points from across the resources. Thus, our approach was to design
a system which would integrate commercial and public data within a dataspace.
The requirements for such a platform were:

 Metadata about commercial datasets should be available to all, however
private datasets should remain hidden except to those who are authorized
to access the data;

 Only authorized users should be able to access the commercial and private

datasets;

 Commercial and private data should be seamlessly integrated with open

data.

3 Pilot Commercial Datasets

For this pilot study we obtained data from three commercial systems  GOSTAR
from GVK Biosciences4, Integrity from Thompson Reuters5, and the AurSCOPE

http://thomsonreuters.com/pipeline-data-integrator/ accessed July 2013.
https://gostardb.com/gostar/ accessed July 2013.
http://integrity.thomson-pharma.com/ accessed July 2013.

C. Goble et al.

databases from Aureus Sciences6 (now part of Elsevier). These datasets have
already been licensed to many pharmaceutical companies for use on their internal
IT infrastructure. Thus, commercial data providers already trust third parties to
secure their data. Sample data were provided based on a number of specifically
selected pharmacological targets in order to demonstrate the utility of combining
these data and identifying the challenges, both technical and social, in including
commercial and private data in an open linked data platform.

The commercial datasets differ in both their sources of data and other properties they capture. Public resources such as PubChem and ChEMBL tend to
focus on published data, either from journal articles or direct from laboratories
themselves. For instance, ChEMBL collates information for 1.3 million bioactive
drug-like small molecules mainly extracted from over 50,000 journal articles by
expert curation. In contrast, the GVK GOSTAR database includes millions of
structures sourced from the patent literature as well as scientific literature. Fi-
nally, the Thompson Reuters Integrity database supplements patent and journal
bioactivity with rich information on key drug discovery elements such as phar-
macokinetics, company pipelines and clinical progression. Thus, a true picture
of the bioactivity space is only available by combining all of these resources,
i.e. open, commercial and private datasets.

4 Open PHACTS Discovery Platform

Building upon the Open PHACTS Discovery Platform that is detailed in [10]
we discuss the incorporation of private and commercial data into an open linked
data platform. The Open PHACTS Discovery Platform, depicted in Fig. 1, exposes a domain specific web service API to a variety of end user applications.
The domain API co-ordinates the access to a series of services that enable the
desired functionality. Briefly, the Domain Specific Services enable chemical structure and similarity searches as well as providing a chemical registration service
(see Section 4.2); the Identity Resolution Service maps textual strings to concepts denoted with a URI; the Identity Mapping Service (IMS) supports the
management of multiple URIs denoting the same concept; and the Linked Data
Cache provides a triplestore that contains a local copy of each of the datasets.
Data is cached locally for performance reasons.

The following steps have been identified for incorporating new data into the

Open PHACTS Discovery Platform.

1. Define the use cases for which the data will be used, this is led by the research
questions which drive the development of the Open PHACTS Discovery
Platform [2].

2. Work with the data providers to generate RDF with dataset descriptions

(see Sections 5.1 and 4.1).

3. Create instance level mappings from the new data source to existing data

sources (see Section 5.2).

http://www.aureus-sciences.com/ accessed July 2013.
?

?

?
User Interface & Applications 

Domain API 

Domain 
Specific 
Services 

Identity 

Resolution 

Service 

Identity 
Mapping 
Service 

Linksets 

Linked 
Data 
Cache 

Data 

Sources 

Fig. 1. Main components of the Open PHACTS Discovery Platform. Components in
blue represent the core platform which exposes a domain specific API for application
developers and relies on existing published data.

4. Index data for text to URI resolution.
5. Load RDF into data cache.
6. Identify data access paths required and extend or create SPARQL queries

for API calls (see Section 5.3).

In the following we will discuss the privacy issues we encountered when incorporating private and commercial data into the Open PHACTS Discovery Platform.
Section 5 discusses the technical challenges of modelling and linking the data.

4.1 Dataset Descriptions

Open PHACTS have specified a minimal information model for dataset descriptions [11] based on VoID [1]. The dataset description enables the dataset to be
discovered, license information to be known, and for provenance of results to be
returned to user requests. As per the fourth principle of [27], we believe that
it is desirable that the dataset descriptions are open and accessible to all. This
supports the discovery of data and can bring additional revenue to commercial
dataset providers: it can be seen as advertisement for the product. However, this
openness directly conflicts with the privacy requirements of the private datasets
of the pharmaceutical companies.

Currently the dataset description guidelines require a substantial level of detail
about the creation, sources, and release of the dataset. It also requests that
statistics about the dataset, e.g. the number of concepts, are made available.
With regard to commercial datasets, a balance needs to be found between the
amount of information that can be exposed and the perceptions of the dataset.
There are advantages to data providers in advertising the availability of a dataset
in a dataset description; pointing to the providers website allowing potential

C. Goble et al.

customers to discover the existence of commercial pharmacology data without
being able to access it until they subscribe. There are also potential downsides.
Providers might be more wary of releasing detailed dataset statistics as this could
affect the perception of their product (e.g. reporting a lower number of records
than their competitor, even though these records might be of higher quality). We
are in the process of revising the Open PHACTS dataset description guidelines
for open and commercial datasets so that enough provenance information can
be provided to the end users whilst addressing the concerns of the commercial
data providers.

With regard to private datasets, it is imperative that such descriptions are not
available to all: the knowledge of the existence of a dataset on a given topic is
deemed as a commercial secret. However, dataset descriptions are still required in
order that applications can display information correctly, the platform can decide
about access to the data, and provenance about query answers can be provided
to users of that data thus enabling them to verify the sources of data used to
compute their query results. Therefore for private datasets we expect a minimal
set of properties to be provided. These include the title of the dataset for use
by applications built on top of the Open PHACTS Discovery Platform, licence
used to help decide who can access the data, publisher, and issued date/version
number. This metadata would only be used to respond to queries where valid
credentials have been used and provides a minimal provenance trail for the data.

4.2 Chemical Registration Service

It is common for compounds in different datasets to be represented differently
and this can lead to various challenges when comparing and interlinking data.
To ensure data quality for the representation of chemical compounds, the Open
PHACTS Discovery Platform provides a chemical registration service [14]. The
chemical registration service reads a standard chemical structure information file
(SD File) [8] and performs validation and standardization of the representations
of the compound. The validation step checks the chemical representation for
chemistry issues such as hypervalency, charge imbalance, absence of stereochem-
istry, etc; while the standardization step uses a series of rules, generally those
associated with the US Food and Drug Administrations Substance Registration
System [23], to standardize the chemical representations including the generation of charge neutral forms of the compound, non-stereo forms of the chemical,
etc.

From the input SD file the chemical registration service generates an RDF
representation of the data, with each distinct chemical structure being given
its own identifier (URI). Various properties are computed including a unique
string representing the compound (InChI) [17] together with a hash representation (InChI Key), and properties that can be derived from the canonical struc-
ture, e.g. SMILES strings and various physicochemical properties. Based on the
standard InChI representation, the chemical registration service is able to collapse and aggregate the open chemical datasets used in the Open PHACTS
?

?

?
Discovery Platform, e.g. ChEBI, ChEMBL, and DrugBank; and thus generate
linksets from the chemical registration data to each of these datasets.

The chemical registration service has been developed specifically to meet the
privacy needs of the private and commercial data providers. It is a requirement
that compounds in these datasets are not inserted into open datasets such as
ChemSpider when they are deposited into the Open PHACTS Discovery Plat-
form. Such inserts to open datasets would enable pharmaceutical companies to
discover the compounds of interest of their competitors. Another consideration
are the results returned to a chemical structure search. A compound is returned
if and only if the molecule exists in one or more data sources to which the user
has access rights. There is an interesting question of when a molecule exists
in an open, commercial and private dataset, should the user know it is in the
commercial and private dataset even though they do not have access rights?
For private datasets, the answer is clearly no; otherwise commercially sensitive
information about the dataset is passed on. However, for commercial datasets it
could be seen as an advertisement for the dataset; as the user is unable to access
the commercial data associated with the molecule, i.e. the value added data.
Currently we are following an opt-in policy whereby the commercial providers
need to choose to have their data returned to such searches. Thus, the data
generated by the chemical registration service is given the same privacy level as
the incoming data.

5 Converting Commercial Data to Linked Data

Converting proprietary data to linked data is quite similar to converting open
data to linked data, and similar problems occur. One important aspect is interpreting the meaning of the incoming data, e.g. property names in relational
schema are often not documented. However, this problem is not a consequence
of the open or closed nature of the data. Instead, it is one of being able to get
answers from the data providers; indeed, if the provider of open data is unwilling
to provide answers, the outcome is identical.

It may be noted, however, that one should expect the context of the proprietary data may lie in data that cannot be shared. For example, the data may
use internal ontologies to classify objects.

Another important aspect is that the dataset description should clearly state
what users can and cannot do with the data. This may be less clearly specified
with proprietary data where non standard licenses are used.

5.1 Data Modelling

The Open PHACTS project have provided guidelines [12], as a how-to guide,
for the creation of five star linked data [4] for use within the Open PHACTS
Discovery Platform. Here we discuss the conversion of an existing commercial or
private dataset into RDF.

C. Goble et al.

The original data is provided in some format: typically a database dump or
an SD file for chemical data. Chemical data is passed through the chemical registration service (see Section 4.2) in order to ensure basic properties are available
in the Open PHACTS Discovery Platform together with links to relate the compounds to other datasets. The data is converted into RDF and loaded into the
data cache. An important aspect of modelling the data in RDF is removing any
details of the underlying relational database, e.g. tables, keys, and indices. These
relationships should be captured through the ontology that will be used to represent the data and the properties that it provides, i.e. they are replaced by the
scientific notion they represent.

Data Structure. The three commercial datasets in this pilot study include
binding data for targets with compounds. Due to the similarity with the public
ChEMBL data, the triple structure used by the ChEMBL-RDF data structure
[29] was used, as a de facto standard for encoding such data. However, compared
to this approach, we here use the BioAssay Ontology for semantically annotation activities with the biological end points against which measurements were
made [24]. Examples, include the IC50. Various data sources use different string
representations (IC50, IC 50, IC-50, etc), and normalization further improves how we can mine the data.

Proprietary Ontologies. Some of the data in the commercial datasets refers
to internal (implicit) ontologies. For example, the input data provided by the
commercial partners includes controlled vocabularies, often including internal
database identifiers. Some of these have been converted during the process into
an OWL ontology. For example, such internal vocabularies have been detected
in the data for the systems targeted in the experiments (which may be proteins,
but also more complex biological structures) as well as pharmacological modes
of action, and diseases.

However, these vocabularies are currently not further used during the integration process, and touch upon key intellectual property of the partners beyond the
example data provided to us. Moreover, converting such vocabularies into more
formal ontologies is a task in itself, and outside the scope of the work presented
here.

Units. The activity data provided by ChEMBL mostly involves data normalized
to a set of units. However, the data found in these proprietary databases do not
provide normalized values. This stresses the importance of using ontologies for
units, so that such normalization can be done automatically during conversion
to RDF. The jQUDT library was used for this, as was used in Open PHACTS
before [28], because it uses the unit conversions defined in the QUDT ontology
itself, therefore effectively applying ontological reasoning.
?

?

?
5.2 Data Mapping

The Open PHACTS Discovery Platform requires that the Identity Mapping Service (IMS) contains information about mapping the identifiers of concepts across
datasets. This is provided by a series of pairwise linksets that relate instances in
the datasets. For example, the ChemSpider record for aspirin is related to the
ChEMBL record for aspirin as they share the same chemical structure. When a
new dataset is added, links are required to one or more existing datasets in order
that the queries that power the domain API calls can return data from the new
dataset when the API method is given an entry URI from another dataset.

For the interlinking of data about chemical compounds, the IMS is loaded with
the linksets that are generated by the chemical registration service. The chemical
registration service ensures that chemical compounds are mapped across the key
Open PHACTS datasets.

With regard to biological targets (e.g. proteins), there is no equivalent service
to the Open PHACTS chemical registration service. However, datasets tend to
include either links to other datasets, e.g. ChEMBL and UniProt, or the enzyme
commission number which can be linked directly to these datasets.

We do not concern ourselves with the issues of private and commercial data
while linking the data. These are deferred to the graph-based access control used
when querying the data (Section 6.1). This simplifies the mapping approach and
is permissible providing that the IMS is not publicly accessible. In the Open
PHACTS Discovery Platform, the IMS is only available through the domain
API which is deployed on a secure web server and requires user credentials to
gain access.

5.3 Querying Data

The commercial datasets considered in this pilot study are similar in their content to the ChEMBL database. As such, the RDF representation of ChEMBLRDF was used to model the data. By adopting the same structure, the existing
SPARQL queries used to respond to the domain API method calls could be used
with only adding additional graph clauses to cover the commercial data. That
is, each of the commercial datasets is loaded into its own named graph and these
need to be addressed in the query. The benefit of loading each dataset into a
graph is that we can rely on the graph-based access control of the underlying
triplestore, see Section 6.1.

Implementation and Validation

In this section we give details of the graph-based access control employed to
secure the access to the commercial and private data, and detail the validation
of the approach we have applied.

C. Goble et al.

-- Create group
DB.DBA.GRAPH_GROUP_CREATE(http://example.org/group/private);
-- Insert into group
DB.DBA.GRAPH_GROUP_INS(http://example.org/group/private,

http://example.org/graph/a);

DB.DBA.GRAPH_GROUP_INS(http://example.org/group/private,

http://example.org/graph/b);

Fig. 2. Creating a graph group with two members

6.1 Graph-Based Access Control

The Open PHACTS Discovery Platform uses the commercial edition of Virtuoso
7 for its triplestore which provides graph-based access control7. Each of the
datasets used in the Open PHACTS Discovery Platform is loaded into a separate
named graph. The queries that are used to respond to the domain API method
calls are separated into graph blocks which control the properties that come
from each of the datasets. Due to these design decisions we are able to employ
the graph-based access control in Virtuoso to ensure that only authorised users
are given access to commercial and private datasets.

Graph Groups. To make authorization manageable when dealing with a large
number of graphs, Virtuoso introduces the concept of graph groups. A graph
group has an IRI which represents a number of graphs. The commands for creating a graph group are given in Fig. 2.

The SPARQL query processor will macroexpand a graph group IRI in the
dataset defined by a FROM clause into a list of its respective graphs if the executing user has permission to access the list of members of said graph group.
The SPARQL query language implementation is also extended with NOT FROM
and NOT FROM NAMED clauses to restrict the dataset in a query. This exclusion may also be defined through runtime parameters passed with the SPARQL
query.

Authentication. Virtuoso triplestore inherits its user management from the
underlying SQL database. Any query, including SPARQL queries, execute with
the privileges of a valid SQL user. In case of the unauthenticated endpoint, the
executing user8 and privileges thereof are defined by the virtual directory settings
for said endpoint in the internal web server. Besides the standard SPARQL
protocol endpoint, one can use separate pre-defined endpoints 9 for RFC261710,

http://docs.openlinksw.com/virtuoso/rdfgraphsecurity.html accessed July
2013.

8 Default user is SPARQL.
9 /sparql-auth, /sparql-oauth, /sparql-webid.

http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2617.txt accessed July 2013.
?

?

?
DB.DBA.USER_CREATE(John,VerySecretPassword);
GRANT SPARQL_SELECT TO "John";
GRANT SPARQL_UPDATE TO "John";

Fig. 3. Creating a user, granting read-write permissions

OAuth11, and WebID12 authentication. For added security, one can use TLS for
encryption. This is especially important if RFC2617 basic authentication is used,
as plaintext-equivalent credentials would be passed by the client otherwise.

Customized authentication protocols can be added by declaring an authentication hook function for the internal web servers virtual directory hosting the
endpoint. Authentication functions are Virtuoso stored procedures with full access to the incoming requests URL, headers and body. Hence, custom user table
lookups may be performed or credentials validated through an external web service using the built-in client. Upon successful validation, the function may set
the sessions effective SQL user and return a value signaling the server to proceed
with processing the request. The function may produce a reply (re)requesting
client authentication, and cancel any further processing, should the validation
fail.

Authorization. Once a user has been authenticated, there remain two levels
of authorization: On the top level we have the SQL privileges mechanism  any
SPARQL operations on behalf of the user require SQL privileges SPARQL SELECT,
and possibly SPARQL UPDATE to have been granted to said user (Fig. 3). On the
second level we have graph-level authorization, where a user can be granted
(additional) access to individual graphs or graph groups.

Permissions. Graph permissions are sets of
{u, g, p},

where u is a valid SQL user, g is a graph or graph group IRI, and p is an integer
value representing a bit vector as seen in Table 1. A simple API is provided for
managing the permissions. See example in Fig. 4.

6.2 Validation

We have instantiated a test prototype of the Open PHACTS Discovery Platform
to meet the needs of the pilot study to support commercial and private data. The
main challenges, as reported in Sections 4 and 5, have been around modelling
and interlinking the commercial data. The commercial data prototype Open
PHACTS Discovery Platform correctly responds to method calls. For example,

http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5849.txt accessed July 2013.
http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/webid/spec/ accessed July 2013.

C. Goble et al.

Table 1. Graph permission bits

Mask Permission
0x1
0x2
0x4
0x8

allow read access
allow write access via SPARUL
allow write access via Sponger
allow retrieval of list of members in a graph group

-- be very restrictive by default
DB.DBA.RDF_DEFAULT_USER_PERMS_SET (nobody, 0);
-- Create user John
DB.DBA.RDF_DEFAULT_USER_PERMS_SET (John, 0);
-- John can read this group
DB.DBA.RDF_GRAPH_USER_PERMS_SET

(http://example.org/group/private, John, 9);

-- Read-write access to own graph
DB.DBA.RDF_GRAPH_USER_PERMS_SET

(http://example.org/people/john,John, 7);

Fig. 4. Setting premissions for a graph

in responding to a pharmacology by target method call we received additional
query answers when credentials that were allowed to access the commercial data
were used.

Security. The Open PHACTS Discovery Platform is accessible through standard security approaches to secure the data and provide access to it, e.g. HTTPS
for web service access, API keys from 3scale13, and graph-based access control.
The graph-level security subsystem of Virtuoso is equipped with an audit procedure that checks the consistency of security rules and integrity of security-related
data. These approaches have satisfied the commercial data providers involved in
this pilot study.

Data. The scripts generated and used to convert the commercial data into RDF
have been validated and discussed with the relevant data publisher. For each
dataset, a report has been generated outlining the scripts and the rationale for
their approach for generating RDF. The reports also include, in their appendices,
the source code for the scripts and the generated data. The commercial data
providers have been satisfied with the accuracy of the RDF data conversion.

7 Related Work

There is a considerable body of work on the conversion of datasets into RDF and
making them accessible as linked data [13]. Specifically within the life sciences

http://www.3scale.net/ accessed July 2013.
?

?

?
the Banff manifesto [3] provides six rules of thumb for generating linked data and
recommended best practices have been identified by the W3C Health Care and
Life Sciences (HCLS14) interest group [16]. These community guidelines have
been followed in the Bio2RDF conversion of many life sciences open datasets [5].
They are also the basis on the Open PHACTS RDF how-to guidelines [12]
which have been used in the generation of the open and commercial datasets
used in this pilot study.

Related to the generation of the data is the metadata description of the data.
While VoID [1] has gained widespread use in the linked data community, there
are no required properties and thus a large variation in the amount and quality
of the metadata provided. Within the Open PHACTS project, we have specified a checklist of properties to provide [11]; these enable API responses to be
augmented with appropriate levels of provenance information. This work has
considered how these guidelines should be employed for commercial and private
datasets.

In [7] the authors identify the research challenges and discuss a range of
business models for linked closed data, i.e. commercial data. Cobden et al. focus
on the sustainability of open data and a variety of business models, e.g. using
advertising, to cover the hosting costs. However, this is considered on a per
dataset basis. The focus of this work has been on incorporating private and
commercial data into an open linked data platform to provide an integrated
dataspace.

8 Conclusions

This pilot study has investigated the issues and challenges of incorporating commercial and private datasets into a linked open data platform. Samples of three
commercial datasets were used to identify the challenges in converting the data
and ensuring appropriate access control mechanisms. Apart from these technical
issues, we also encountered social challenges around incorporating private and
commercial data into an open system. These were centred around openly publishing metadata about the datasets, required for providing provenance to method
calls, and registering chemical compounds in a central service. We adopted a
stance whereby open and commercial dataset descriptions should be public, although possibly with different levels of granularity, while the descriptions of
private datasets should remain private. With regard to the data generated by
the chemical registration service, these retain the same privacy level as their
source. A similar approach has been adopted for the linksets between datasets.
A key concern of the data providers is trusting someone else with their valuable
datasets. They require strong guarantees that such data will be safe in the hands
of a third party such as Open PHACTS. The security mechanisms employed
address these concerns.

http://www.w3.org/blog/hcls/ accessed July 2013.

C. Goble et al.

The Open PHACTS Discovery Platform15 has been released in April 2013 and
is already seeing take-up by the pharmaceutical companies as well as academic
researchers. Commercial data will be included in a release in late 2013, based on
both the technical and social outcomes of this pilot.

Acknowledgements. The research has received support from the Innovative
Medicines Initiative Joint Undertaking under grant agreement number 115191,
resources of which are composed of financial contribution from the European
Unions Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007- 2013) and EFPIA com-
panies in kind contribution. Support was also received from the UK EPSRC
myGrid platform grant (EP/G026238/1).

We would like to thank the three companies for providing us with the sample
data: GOSTAR from GVK Biosciences, Integrity from Thompson Reuters, and
the AurSCOPE from Aureus Sciences, now part of Elsevier.
