 

Semantic Data and Models Sharing in Systems Biology: 
The Just Enough Results Model and the SEEK Platform 

Katherine Wolstencroft1,3, Stuart Owen1, Olga Krebs2, Wolfgang Mueller2,  

Quyen Nguyen2, Jacky L. Snoep1, and Carole Goble1  

1 School of Computer Science, University of Manchester,  

Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL  

2 HITS gGmbH, Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg 35, Heidelberg, Germany, 69118 

3 Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands 
kwolstencroft@cs.man.ac.uk, sowen@cs.manchester.ac.uk, 
{olga.krebs,Wolfgang.Mueller,Quyen.Nguyen}@h-its.org, 

jls@SUN.AC.ZA, carole.goble@manchester.ac.uk 

Abstract. Research in Systems Biology involves integrating data and knowledge 
about  the  dynamic  processes  in  biological  systems  in  order  to  understand  and 
model them. Semantic web technologies should be ideal for exploring the complex networks of genes, proteins and metabolites that interact, but much of this 
data is not natively available to the semantic web. Data is typically collected and 
stored with free-text annotations in spreadsheets, many of which do not conform 
to existing metadata standards and are often not publically released.  

Along with initiatives to promote more data sharing, one of the main challenges  is  therefore  to  semantically  annotate  and  extract  this  data  so  that  it  is 
available to the research community.  Data annotation and curation are expensive  and  undervalued  tasks  that have  enormous  benefits  to  the  discipline  as  a 
whole, but fewer benefits to the individual data producers. 

By  embedding  semantic  annotation  into  spreadsheets,  however,  and  automatically extracting this data into RDF at the time of repository submission, the 
process  of  producing  standards-compliant  data,  that  is  available  for  semantic 
web querying, can be achieved without adding additional overheads to laboratory data management. This paper describes these strategies in the context of semantic data management in the SEEK. The SEEK is a web-based resource for 
sharing and exchanging Systems Biology data and models that is underpinned 
by the JERM ontology (Just Enough Results Model), which describes the relationships  between  data,  models,  protocols  and  experiments.  The  SEEK  was 
originally developed for SysMO, a large European Systems Biology consortium 
studying micro-organisms, but it has since had widespread adoption across European Systems Biology. 

Keywords: Semantic Systems Biology, Semantic Data Management, OWL On-
tology, RDF Extraction from spreadsheets, Standard Metadata. 

H. Alani et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2013, Part II, LNCS 8219, pp. 212227, 2013. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 

Introduction 

Semantic Data and Models Sharing in Systems Biology 

Systems Biology is a field of study that aims to understand biological and biomedical 
systems  by  analyzing  and  modeling  their  dynamic  behavior.  Mathematical  models 
describing, for example, metabolic processes or genetic networks, can be used to predict the behavior of the system under different biological conditions or stresses. Linking together experimental data, models and model simulation results is therefore central to Systems Biology. Naturally, this involves a large amount of data integration.. 
Scientists need to combine different sources of heterogeneous information in order to 
model biological systems, and relate those models to available experimental data for 
validation.  

The semantic web should be an ideal technology to assist with the process of identifying  relevant  data  and  their  relationships;  and  there  are  a  growing  collection  of 
semantic  web  resources  for  Systems  Biology.  For  example,  the  Semantic  Systems 
Biology  portal  [1]  and 
the  Chem2Bio2RDF  [2]  resources  allow  SPARQL 
(http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/)  queries  across  Life  Science  data,  and  the 
Systems Biology Ontology [3] allows scientists to semantically describe their models. 
The  bottleneck,  however,  is  not  with  available  vocabularies  and  frameworks  for 
querying  semantic  Systems  Biology  data,  it  is  with  collecting  and  sharing  Systems 
Biology data in a format that is amenable to semantic web querying. Currently, only a 
small fraction of the data and models produced during Systems Biology investigations 
are deposited for reuse by the community, and only a smaller fraction of that data is 
standards compliant, semantic content. 

Funding  agencies  in  Europe,  such  as  the  BBSRC  in  the  UK  and  the  BMBF  in 
Germany, have developed new data policies to encourage and increase sharing. These 
policies  stipulate  that  all  data  produced  using  public  funding  should  be  shared  with 
the  scientific  community,  and  should  be  made  available  for  a  period  of  10  years 
(http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/datasharing).  However,  for  this  to  happen  on  a  large-scale, 
the community needs tools, repositories and standards to allow the systematic collection of adequately described data and to ensure the data is computationally amenable. 
For many types of experimental data, this situation has already improved. For exam-
ple,  there  are  repositories  like  GEO  [4]  and  ArrayExpress  [5]  for  microarray  data, 
with corresponding standard formats and ontologies (MAGEML and MGED ontology 
respectively [6]).  

The complication for Systems Biology is that there isn't one type of data, and there 
is added value from understanding and preserving the relationships between multiple 
different  data  sets.  One  Systems  Biology  model,  for  instance,  could  be  constructed 
from the interactions between transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics data. If 
these data sets are publically shared, but submitted to their respective omics data silos, 
these relationships could be lost.  

The SEEK platform [7] is a web-based resource for sharing heterogeneous Systems 
Biology data and models and preserving associations between datasets and models. It 
is  based  on  the  ISA  infrastructure  (Investigations,  Studies  and  Assays),  a  standard  

K. Wolstencroft et al. 

format for describing how individual experiments (assays) are aggregated into wider 
studies and investigations [8]. For the SEEK, ISA has been extended in order to encompass the description of mathematical models, and the relationships between them 
and the data.  

The SEEK is a semantic integration resource. All metadata from experiments is extracted  and  stored  in  RDF  (Resource  Description  Framework,  http://www.w3.org/ 
RDF/) and the relationships are defined and described by the underlying JERM ontology (the Just Enough Results Model Ontology). The majority of data is uploaded to 
the SEEK as Excel spreadsheets, so the RightField semantic spreadsheet application  
[9] (also developed during this work) is used to embed semantic annotation into the 
data. 

This  paper  describes  the  semantic  data  integration  in  the  SEEK,  and  how  it  supports the whole life cycle of data collection, annotation, sharing and reuse in Systems 
Biology. It draws on experiences in deploying this system in the SysMO Consortium, 
consisting of over 350 scientists, in over 100 laboratories.  

The  SysMO  Consortium  (Systems  Biology  of  Micro-Organisms)  is  investigating 
systems  approaches  to  studying  wide  variety  of  micro-organisms,  including  model 
organisms (like E. Coli and yeast) and microbes that are industrially important, such 
as those used in bio fuel or food production (e.g. Clostridium acetobutylicum or Lactic Acid bacteria, respectively). One of the main aims of the SysMO initiative is to: 
"record and describe the dynamic molecular processes going on in unicellular microorganisms in a comprehensive way and to present these processes in the form of computerized mathematical models." (http://www.sysmo.net) 

Work with SysMO demonstrates that semantic data sharing and integration can be 
achieved  by  lowering  the  barriers  to  semantic  annotation  and  extraction  to  RDF, 
whilst providing greater incentives to encourage the initial data sharing.  

The paper is structured in the following way. Section 2 describes the JERM ontology and its function as both a central organizational framework and a vocabulary for 
describing Systems Biology data. Section 3 describes the capturing and extraction of 
RDF and section 4 evaluates the richness of queries possible compared to more conventional  methods.  Section  5  discusses  related  work,  and  section  6  describes  experiences and conclusions. 

The Just Enough Results Model Ontology 

The  JERM  Ontology  is  an  application  ontology  designed  to  describe  the  items  in 
SEEK  and  the  relationships  between  them  (for  example,  data,  models,  experiment 
descriptions,  results,  samples,  protocols,  standard  operating  procedures  and  publications - subsequently referred to as SEEK assets); and to enable these relationships to 
be expressed with formal semantics. It is based on the idea of the Minimal Information Model [10]. Minimum Information Models have recently gained popularity in the 
Life  Sciences  because  they  offer  a  pragmatic  solution  to  the  provision  of  sufficient 
metadata.  Metadata  annotation  is  both  time-consuming  and  costly,  and  the  biggest  
 

 
?

?

?
benefits are not for the data producers, but for scientists wishing to reuse data. A Minimum  Information  Model  is  the  smallest  amount  of  metadata  required  in  order  to 
make experimental data discoverable and interpretable by other scientists. 

Most  Minimum  Information  Models  have  been  developed  by  communities  of 
scientists  working  with  a  particular  technology  or  experimental  method.  They  are 
expressed as checklists, or XML specifications (schemas). There are already over 50, 
which have been collected under the umbrella of MIBBI (Minimum Information for 
Biological and Biomedical Investigations). The JERM takes the specification one step 
further, expressing the minimum information model as an OWL ontology.  

The JERM provides  a  unifying  framework  for  metadata elements  common  across 
MIBBI, and complies with existing MIBBI guidelines where they are available. The 
JERM describes SEEK assets and the relationships between assets and the experiments 
that  created  them  (available  from  the  BioPortal  http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ 
ontologies/1488). Crucially, all assets are related to the scientists that created them and 
the projects they originate from, so the ontology captures provenance information as 
well as physical links between assets. JERM definitions for each type of data in SEEK 
is different, but highly overlapping. 

The JERM describes  what type of experiment  was performed,  who performed it, 
and  what  was  measured.  These  elements  are  common  to  all  data  types  in  Systems 
Biology,  but  each  data  type  (e.g.  microarray,  mass  spectrometry,  enzymatic  reac-
tions),  requires  a  different  set  of  additional  metadata.  For  enzyme  experiments,  the 
reactions being catalyzed need to be recorded, with substrates, products, and details of 
inhibition. For microarray experiments, the methods for quality control and normalization  of  the  data  should  be  recorded.  For  proteomics  or  metabolomics  with  Mass 
spectrometry,  detailed  descriptions  of  the  instruments  are  required.  For  all  cases, 
however, a description of the biological samples and any treatments applied is essential in order to understand the results of the experiment.  

Using the JERM ontology to describe SEEK assets, and representing them in RDF, 
is  essential  to  the  sustainability  of  the  resource.  Data  produced  using  continuously 
developed  new  experimental  techniques    must  be  incorporated  into  the  SEEK.  The 
flexibility  and  extensibility  of  RDF  is  ideal  for  such  conditions.  Using  the  JERM 
framework  means  that  adding  a  new  data  type  is  possible  without  requiring  the  redesign of the underlying data model. Any new data type would have the same set of 
minimal  metadata  elements,  plus  some  elements  specific  to  that  data.  This  would 
allow aggregation at any point of commonality (for example, the biological samples, 
the same factors studied, or membership of the same study), but the fact that there are 
differences between datasets is an advantage and not a complication. 

At the time of writing, the JERM ontology contained 262 classes and 43 properties. 
It is represented in OWL in order to capture rich associations between SEEK assets 
and to allow complex queries and reasoning. The terms and properties of the JERM 
ontology therefore provide a schema for managing and extracting SEEK metadata. An 
OWL  ontology,  however,  is  not  a  suitable  representation  for  laboratory  biologists. 
The JERM schemas must be presented in a way that enables their use, without requiring  the  Systems  Biologists  to  invest  time  and  resources  in  learning  new  tools  and 
ontology/RDF skills.  

K. Wolstencroft et al. 

In  the  SysMO  consortium,  the  majority  of  laboratory  scientists  (microbiologists, 
biochemists,  molecular  biologists,  and  geneticists)  use  spreadsheets  for  the  daily 
management and manipulation of data. By embedding the JERM metadata model in a 
spreadsheet format, and enabling the use of JERM (and other) vocabulary terms for 
annotation, the process of standardized semantic data collection can become part of 
the existing data management activities in the laboratory. JERM-compliance in SEEK 
is therefore achieved by the sharing of JERM-compliant spreadsheet templates. 

2.1 

JERM Templates 

JERM spreadsheet templates have been developed for a wide range of experimental 
data types. In collaboration with members of the SysMO consortium, templates have 
been  designed  for  numerous  different  types  of  microarray  and  RNA-Seq  data,  pro-
teomics,  interactomics,  metabolomics,  and  enzyme  kinetics.    Figure  2  shows  how 
JERMs for different experiment types, with different metadata content and structures 
can overlap and interrelate in the SEEK. 

Fig.  1.  A  depiction  of  different  JERM  representations  for  different  data  types,  showing  how 
they can be aggregated at points of commonality and how they can retain their different structures where they differ 

 

The JERM templates each follow the same basic format. The first worksheet contains metadata elements describing the data set and its provenance. Worksheet 2 describes the properties and conditions of samples, which includes the organism, strains 
and any genetic modifications (compliant with the BioSamples metadata specification 
from the EBI). The final mandatory worksheet is a matrix that contains the actual data 
values obtained from measurements on each sample and their specific conditions (e.g. 
specific  time-points,  concentrations  of  metabolites  or  carbon  sources,  etc).  Sample  
 

 
?

?

?
labels should correspond to the labels in the data matrix, so that the BioSamples sheet 
acts as a key to the details of the data matrix. Optional worksheets describing derived 
results or details of the instrument specifications can also be added, but these are not 
currently converted to RDF by default. Where metadata standards require the use of 
ontology terms  for annotation, the JERM templates contain drop-down  lists of only 
those terms that are permissible for a certain metadata element. These terms, and other semantic content, are embedded in the spreadsheet using the RightField application 
(see section 3 for a full description of RightField). 

The resulting collection of data sets have a uniform structure and uniform seman-
tics,  and  can  be  interpreted  by  both  scientists  and  computational  systems.  This  is 
achieved without exposing scientists to any semantic web infrastructure and without 
requiring scientists to adopt new technologies and data management techniques. Figure 3 shows an excerpt from a typical metadata sheet in a JERM template. 

Fig.  2.  An  extract  from  a  JERM  template  describing  an  enzymatic  activity  assay.  The  dropdown list shows the terms permitted for the JERM "Assay  Type" classification. Each yellow 
shaded  box  represents  a  cell  with  embedded  semantic  content,  which  can  be  automatically 
extracted into RDF using the RightField application. 

Capturing and Extracting Semantic Data 

JERM  templates  contain  semantic  content.  An  RDF  triple  can  be  defined  for  each 
spreadsheet  cell  that  contains  JERM-compliant  metadata.  For  example,  in  the  cell  

K. Wolstencroft et al. 

containing the title, the underlying triple states that "Asset has_title, title", where the 
scientists supplies the title as free text. In the cell describing the environmental condi-
tions, "Asset has_part environmentalCondition", where the permissible environmental conditions are presented as a simple, drop-down list in the cell. The cell therefore 
contains  the  vocabulary  of  terms  to  be  used  for  annotation  (taken  from  the  JERM 
ontology  in  this  case),  and  the  property  that  describes  the  relationship  between  the 
dataset and the annotation.   

These  semantic  augmentations  are  provided  using  RightField.  RightField  is  an 
open-source  cross-platform  java  application  that  provides  a  mechanism  for  embedding  semantic content into Excel or Open  Office  Spreadsheets. It  was developed as 
part of SEEK, but it is a stand-alone application that has been used in applications in 
the Life Sciences and others, including standardizing  medical record collection, and 
the cataloguing of Egyptian mummy samples.  

RightField  allows  the  marking-up  of  individual  cells,  ranges  of  cells,  or  whole 
rows and columns, with particular selections of ontology terms. For example, all subclasses  (or  all  direct  sub-classes),  or  all  instances  (or  only  direct  instances),  can  be 
included  from  a  particular  class  in  an  ontology.  Multiple  ontologies  can  be  used  to 
embed content into any one spreadsheet, but each cell can only display a selection of 
terms from a single ontology.  

The  RightField  client  interface  is  not  designed  to  be  used  by  all  SEEK  end-user 
scientists. Preparing a RightField-enabled spreadsheet is an administrative task for the 
bioinformatics  specialists  on  the  project.  Once  a  template  has  been  prepared,  the 
spreadsheet  can  be  shared  and  used  by  the  scientists,  without  exposing  them  to  
the  underlying  semantic  content.  In  SysMO  SEEK,  a  collection  of  templates  have 
been  prepared  and  shared  for  a  number  of  different  experimental  data  types 
(https://seek.sysmo-db.org/help/templates).  

RightField also enables the automated extraction of data into RDF. Due to the fact 
that the subject, predicate and object have already been defined by filling in the template with experimental data, RDF statements can be automatically generated for each 
cell. Therefore an RDF graph, or collection of graphs, can be generated for each data 
set. In SysMO, the resulting RDF graphs comply with the JERM ontology model, so 
more complex queries and reasoning can be performed using the OWL representation.  
RightField transforms the experimental metadata into RDF, but does not currently 
transform data value literals. However, future versions of RightField will allow ranges 
of cells to be referenced from other cells as part of an RDF triple. This will enable the 
actual data values to be defined and treated as data sets, associating data more easily 
with error and standard deviation values, for example. 

As RightField-enabled data is uploaded to SEEK, an RDF representation of its metadata is extracted and stored in a Virtuoso triplestore (http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/). 
A  SPARQL  end-point  to  public  data  in  SEEK  is  available  at:  http://iswc.sysmo-
db.org/sparql. 

RightField-enabled  spreadsheets  allow  the  collection  of  semantic  information  by 
stealth.  The  semantics  are  embedded  in  the  spreadsheet,  a  tool  that  is  already  in  
 

 
?

?

?
common use for data management. This provides a low barrier for uptake and ensures 
that those using the JERM templates do not require prior knowledge of the Semantic 
Web  and  ontologies.  Term  labels  are  displayed  in  the  spreadsheets,  but  the  IRI  of 
each label is also stored in hidden sheets, along with the ontology URI and ontology 
version information. By embedding the terms and their provenance, the  spreadsheet 
remains  self-contained  and  can  therefore  be  used  and  shared  in  the  same  way  as  a 
regular spreadsheet. If ontology versions change after the creation of a JERM spread-
sheet,  they  will  not  be  updated  until,  or  unless,  the  template  is  re-opened  in  the 
RightField client. This is essential for the consistent collection and annotation of data. 
If an experiment takes months to complete, all data from that experiment should be 
annotated with the same versions of the same ontologies. Updating templates to use 
newer  versions  of  ontologies  should  be  a  conscious  decision  and  not  an  automated 
process. 

One potential limitation of the system is that if SEEK scientists choose not to use 
JERM templates, the amount of metadata that can be collected, and therefore the RDF 
graph of that data, is reduced. However, anything uploaded to SEEK is linked to the 
person and the project it belongs to, the organism under investigation, and the assay 
type and technology type of the asset is also recorded. This provides enough information  for non-standard datasets to be discovered and reused through SEEK, although 
the contents cannot be fully explored. 

Evaluation: 20 Questions  

The user interface to the SEEK platform (and its search capabilities) were designed by 
following  Jim  Gray's  20  questions  model  [11]  A  focus  group  of  scientists  from  the 
SysMO  consortium  were  asked  to  list  all  the  questions  they  envisioned  asking  of 
SEEK content. These questions were distilled into the top 20 queries that SEEK must 
be able to answer in order to serve the whole SysMO community. The performance of 
the  SEEK  was evaluated against these questions,  initially  using a  traditional  classic 
search  through  the  SEEK  web  interface  (driven  by  the  Lucene  search  engine),  and 
then  using  the  RDF/SPARQL  end-point.  It  was  determined  that  whilst  the  classic 
search was sufficient for most questions, querying the RDF enabled a greater number 
of queries to be answered.  

The SEEK focus group (also known as the SysMO PALs network ) were a collection  of  post-docs  and  PhD  students  from  each  of  the  SysMO  projects,  covering  a 
broad  range  of  research  areas  in  experimental  biology,  mathematical  modeling  and 
bioinformatics. The questions were obtained before the development of any prototype 
interface, to prevent focus group members being constrained by what they considered 
technically  possible.  Table  1  shows  the  set  of  20  questions  and  the  ability  of  the 
SEEK to return those queries using the classic search and using semantic search over 
the SEEK RDF with SPARQL.  

K. Wolstencroft et al. 

Table 1. The "20 Questions" identified by the SEEK focus group as being the most important 
queries to perform over the SEEK 

Question 
1.  Which  experiments  were  carried  out  on  E.coli  (or-

Classic 
+ 

ganism X)? 

2. Which strains of E.coli (organism X) are being used 

+  

in SysMO? 

3.  What  proteomic  (experiment  x)  data  is  available? 
What types of transcriptomics (assay type x) experiments 
were performed? 

+/+ 

+ 

+ 

+/+ 

4.  Who 

has 

experimental 

data 

on 

+/+/+ 

+/+/+ 

gene/protein/metabolite X 

5.  Which  microarray  data  files  show  up-regulation  in 

genes with Gene ontology molecular function X  

6.  What  data  is  available  from  SysMO-LAB  (project 

X)? 

7.What data was used to construct the model and what 

data was used to validate it? 

8. Who is in the COSMIC (project X) project? 
9.  What  Standard  Operating  Procedures  were  used  in 
experiment X? Are there any protocols for Mass Spectroscopy (technology type X) experiments? 

10. Who is working on growth rate (assay type X) ex-

periments? 

11. What publications are available for models in Pseu-

domonas (organism X)? 

12. Are there any models on yeast (models on X)? 
13. Who is in more than one SysMO project? 
14. What are the factors studied in the MOSES project 

(project X)? 

15. What are the data on steady state fluxes in organism 

XXX in condition XXX? 

16. What type of experimental data should I collect to 

apply the Teusink model (model X)?  

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+/- 

+ 

+ 

+ 
- 
- 

- 

+ 

17. What model simulation results are available? 
18.  Is  the  original  data  from  my  archive  sufficient  for 

+ 
+  

model X 

19. How good is the correlation between transcriptome 
levels, proteome levels and enzyme activities in organism 
X in study Y? Is a time delay observed? 

20. What range of concentrations of metabolites (extra- 

and intracellular) are detectable from organism XXX 

- 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+/+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 

- 

+ 

 
The  results  of  the  comparison  show  that  the  classic  search  and  RDF/SPARQL 
query perform equally  well on the  majority of questions. In six cases, however, the 
question  can  only  be  answered  using  RDF/SPARQL,  and  for  question  19,  neither 

 
?

?

?
search method is successful. Question 19 cannot be answered directly because it requires both the extraction of relevant data and the analysis of that data to determine 
correlations.  The  other  differences  in  results  were  caused  by  either  limitations  on 
aggregating information, or a reliance on data held externally to SEEK. SEEK without RDF capabilities is (of course) limited in providing all conceivable aggregates and 
projections of information. Here, semantic web techniques complement SEEKs capa-
bilities. 

Questions  depending  on  outside  data,  or  information  from  outside  ontologies  are 
not feasible with the classic SEEK. Here the use of Semantic Web techniques gives 
the opportunity to pull in several data sources and then combine them for answering 
the query. The semantic web therefore helps to extend SEEKs capabilities. 

Section 4.2 shows concrete examples of SPARQL queries used to answer a selec-

tion of the original SEEK 20 questions. 

As  shown  in  table  1,  the  majority  of  queries  could  be  answered  using  either  the 
classic  or  RDF/SPARQL  approach.  However,  data  and  models  in  individual  SEEK 
instances exist in a wider ecosystem. There are over 1500 other database resources in 
the  Life  Sciences,  and  many  of  these  are  available  as  Linked  Data.  There  are  also 
other SEEK instances, containing data and  models  from other consortia. This is the 
primary advantage of the RDF/SPARQL approach. The Linked Open Data initiative 
already provides conventions for querying multiple SPARQL end-points. 

The  ability  to  query  the  contents  in  one  data  source  is  useful,  but  the  ability  to 
query across multiple, related data sources is therefore the ultimate goal.  By extracting and serving SEEK data as RDF, SEEK data can also be served as Linked Data. 

4.1 

20 Questions Revised 

A review of the 20 questions, to coincide  with the release of the  first  RDF-enabled 
SEEK  version,  presented  an  opportunity  to  revise  the  questions  and  adapt  to  the 
changing  requirements  of  the  SysMO  consortium.  Over  half  of  the  new  questions 
were  variations on those already posed, but the rest  were much richer and explored 
the detailed content of the data and models. For example, questions such as "Which 
data files contain compound X and/or  receptor Y, in organism Z?", or "what is the 
concentration of fructose bisphosphate in Lactococcus lactis?" make use of the RDF 
aggregation capabilities. Other questions further exploit external data links, for exam-
ple,  "What  experimental  data  exists  in  SEEK  for  the  Gene  Ontology  biological 
process X". Some SEEK data may not be annotated with Gene Ontology terms, so the 
query must identify all gene products annotated with that term, and then match these 
to the gene products in SEEK. This would require interrogating external primary sequence  databases,  such  as  UniProt  [12],  as  well  as  the  Gene  Ontology  [13].    More 
extensive searching over a greater number of external resources is required to answer 
questions such as, "what additional information is known about compound X?". 

The revised 20 questions are being used to inform the design of the next version of 

the SEEK, which will be served as Linked Open Data. 

K. Wolstencroft et al. 

4.2  Example Queries 

The following SPARQL queries can be performed to answer a selection of the questions from table 1. All data returned in SEEK is restricted to data that has been publically  shared.  Every  asset  uploaded  to  SEEK  can  be  shared  with  named  individuals, 
groups, the whole consortium, or released for public view. However, logging-in is not 
required  to  use  the  SPARQL  endpoint,  so  SPARQL  users  are  therefore  considered 
anonymous users.  

1. Which experiments were carried out on E.coli? 

 
SELECT ?title ?assay ?organism  WHERE 
    {    
        GRAPH <iswc13:rdf>  
        { 
           ?organism jerm:NCBI_ID 
<http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/NCBITaxon_562> . 
           ?organism a jerm:organism . 
           ?assay jerm:investigates ?organism . 
           ?assay a jerm:Assay . 
           ?assay dcterms:title ?title . 
        } 
} 
 
E.coli is identified by its NCBI identifier. All assays associated with this organism 
are returned.  
 

2. What metabolomics data is available?  

 
SELECT  ?data ?title   WHERE 
{ 
{  
?types rdfs:subClassOf jerm:metabolomics . 
}  
GRAPH<iswc13:rdf> 
{    
{ 
?assay jerm:hasType jerm:metabolomics. 
} 
UNION { 
?assay jerm:hasType ?types. 
} 
?data jerm:isPartOf ?assay; 
 a jerm:Data. 
?data dcterms:title ?title     
}    

 
?

?

?
GROUP BY ?data 

 

} 
 
 

3. Are there any models on yeast, and what data is associated with those models? 

 
SELECT ?model ?model_title ?assay ?assay_title ?data ?data_title WHERE 
{ 
 GRAPH<iswc13:rdf> 
{ 
 ?organism jerm:NCBI_ID <http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/NCBITaxon_4932>; 
 a jerm:organism . 
 ?model jerm:investigates ?organism; 
    a jerm:Model . 
 ?assay jerm:hasPart ?model; 
  jerm:hasPart ?data. 
 
 ?data dcterms:title ?data_title . 
  ?assay dcterms:title ?assay_title . 
?model dcterms:title ?model_title . 
 
} 
} 
 

4. Find all strains that have had samples derived from them during the second quarter 

of 2012 

SELECT ?specimen ?strain ?strain_title ?ncbi ?sample ?sampling_date 
WHERE { 
   ?specimen a jerm:specimen. 
   ?specimen jerm:isDerivedFrom ?strain. 
   ?strain dcterms:title ?strain_title. 
   ?strain jerm:NCBI_ID ?ncbi. 
   ?sample ?isDerivedFrom ?specimen. 
   ?sample jerm:sampling_date ?sampling_date 
   FILTER ( 
    ?sampling_date > "2012-04-01"^^xsd:date && 
    ?sampling_date < "2012-08-31"^^xsd:date 
  ) 
} 
Query  4  represents  one  of  the  more  complex  queries  collected  in  the  second  re-

quirements session.  

4.3 

Implications for SEEK Querying 

The SEEK triple store provides a powerful mechanism for querying the SEEK contents  and  items  related  to  that  contents  in  other  resources.  It  provides  a  flexible,  

K. Wolstencroft et al. 

sustainable  platform  that  can  be  extended  and  expanded  to  incorporate  new  experimental  data  or  model  types,  without  requiring  the  redesign  of  the  underlying  data 
model (the JERM). In order to query the SEEK triple store in its current form, users 
are  required  to  construct  SPARQL  queries.  This  presents  a  barrier  to  most  SEEK 
users. For data collection, SEEK users are shielded from the details of the semantic 
technologies  by  embedding  them  in  familiar  tools,  such  as  spreadsheets.  The  same 
approach will be adopted for querying the contents. Initially, canned queries will be 
offered through a web interface, allowing users to formulate queries to answer the 20 
questions. This approach is restrictive and loses the flexibility offered by SPARQL, 
but it enables the queries that have been identified as essential in a universally accessible way. The SPARQL end-point will still be available to those that require it, and in 
the long-term, users with SPARQL expertise will be able to construct new queries and 
serve then through the same web front-end. 

Related Work 

The  SEEK  is  a  platform  that  addresses  data  collection,  annotation,  submission  and 
reuse in Systems Biology. It is unique in its approach to embed semantics into existing and familiar tools and it is also unique in the way it collects and stores information on both models and data. The integration and interaction between data and models is the definitive characteristic of the Systems Biology community. 

There are a number of related resources that address some of the same problems as 
those in the SEEK, but most do not support the whole workflow. For example, initiatives  from  the  BioSharing  community  tackle  data  standardization  and  annotation, 
other initiatives from Systems Biology provide repositories for data and models, initiatives from bioinformatics provide RDF representations and Linked Data versions of 
commonly used resources, and initiatives from computer science provide automated 
extraction of RDF from spreadsheets. Summaries of these are described below. 

Bio Sharing 
The BioSharing portal (http://biosharing.org) is a catalogue of standards, formats and 
ontologies that are in use in the Life Sciences. For SEEK, it is a valuable resource for 
identifying community standards that should be used in SEEK. 

The ISA tools suite [14] enables the creation and management of ISA-TAB files. 
ISA  creator  has  similar  functionality  to  RightField.  It  enables  the  creation  of  ISATAB compliant metadata templates to allow groups of scientists to collect standardscompliant semantic metadata. ISA creator also has a spreadsheet-like interface, but it 
is  operated  from  bespoke  client  software  and  designed  for  expert  users  rather  than 
laboratory scientists.  

ISA tools focuses only on experimental data. In SEEK, the ISA structure is used to 
organize  and  link  related  experiments,  but  it  has  been  extended  to  incorporate  the 
relationships between the omics data and models. ISA tools and SEEK have similar 
and complimentary approaches to multi omics data exchange. ISA tools are also developing  an  RDF  representation,  which  should  enable  queries  between  SEEK  and 
other ISA resources in the future. 

 
?

?

?
Systems Biology Semantic Data Resources 
The semantic Systems Biology portal [1] provides access to a data warehouse of Systems Biology data in RDF. Unlike the resources described above, this portal compiles 
available  public  data  and  serves  it  from  the  same  end-point.  For  SEEK  and  related 
resources, it is another source of external data, although the frequency of updates to 
underlying  resources  may  not  reflect  the  frequency  of  updates  in  those  underlying 
resources.  The  Linked  Life  Data  resource  (http://linkedlifedata.com/)  provides  RDF 
and  SPARQL  interfaces  to  a  broader  range  of  biological  data  collections,  and  both 
Bio2RDF  [15] and Chem2bio2RDF [2] provide RDF formatted collections of biological and chemical data respectively. 

Systems Biology Data Management 
The  Data  Integration  Platform  for  Systems  Biology  Collaborations  (DIPSBC)  [16] 
was designed specifically for managing Systems Biology data. Like SEEK, it is compliant  with  existing  community  metadata  standards,  but  it  accepts  and  parses  XML 
representations  of  the  data,  rather  than  spreadsheets.  Data  uploaded  to  DIPSBC  is 
indexed  and  searched  using  Lucene,  and  a  Foswiki  interface  allows  users  to  create, 
share and manage versions of pages and resources as required. It currently does serve 
data as RDF and there is no specific ontology support. 

The  Bioinformatics  Resource  Manager  (BRM)  is  a  java  based  client/server  database system with a PostgreSQL back end. It is a data warehouse system that has been 
designed  for  managing  Systems  Biology  data.  It  imports  data  from  public  sources, 
such as KEGG, NCBI and the Gene ontology, and allows users to combine this public 
data with local data files. Data is incorporated or exported using wizards in the client. 
Like SEEK, local data can be uploaded centrally or stored locally, but unlike SEEK, it 
has no support for Systems Biology model management, and it is not a semantically 
aware resource. 

RDF Extraction from Spreadsheets 
There are several tools that perform extractions of spreadsheet data to RDF. For ex-
ample, Excel2RDF (http://www.mindswap.org/~rreck/excel2rdf.shtml), and RDF123. 
A key difference between these resources and the RightField RDF generation is that 
they focus on the transformation of spreadsheet content, rather than the structure and 
consistency of that content. Therefore, RDF relationships between spreadsheets cells 
are  produced,  rather  than  relationships  between  the  concepts  in  the  content. 
RightField templates allow the extraction of data to a particular metadata model, allowing  the  expression  of  complex  relationships  between  cell  content  across  data-
sheets. In addition, RightField does not require a separate mapping file because this 
information is self-contained. Therefore, cells can be moved around or copied without 
affected the expected RDF produced. 

Discussion 

Standards-compliant data collection and annotation are becoming increasingly important in the Life Sciences. The effective management and reuse of data is essential in 

K. Wolstencroft et al. 

large, collaborative projects and is increasingly becoming a condition of public fund-
ing. Semantic web technologies can have an important role in this process and semantic annotation makes data more valuable for reuse. 

In order to describe Systems Biology studies, multiple experiments, producing diverse  data-types  must  be  described,  interlinked  and  associated  with  corresponding 
mathematical  models.  Systems  Biology  is  therefore  a  discipline  with  complex  data 
management  requirements.  These  must  be  balanced  against  the  time-consuming 
process of data curation and annotation, to enable enough information to be collected 
for discovery and reuse.  

There  are  a  large  number  of  ontologies  and  standards  available  in  the  Life 
Sciences.  Many  of  these  are  directly  relevant  to  Systems  Biology  and  the  SEEK 
draws upon them as annotation vocabularies and metadata schemas in the JERM tem-
plates. Above these resources, the JERM Ontology provides a formal representation 
of the relationships between SEEK assets and a framework for aggregating and integrating metadata. This is a common infrastructure for semantic resources, but SEEK 
differs in the way that the semantics are embedded and hidden behind other applica-
tions. Users do not require prior knowledge of the semantic web or ontologies in order 
to annotate data to a standards-compliant format, or to generate RDF graphs of that 
data. This is one of the largest advantages of the SEEK approach. SEEK users do not 
have  to  change  their  general  data  management  working  practices,  so  the  barrier  to 
adoption is low and attainable by all.  

The SEEK is a system that is deployed and used by multiple consortia of Systems 
Biologists  across  Europe.  At  the  time  of  writing,  the  SysMO  SEEK  contained  over 
2000  assets  that  had  been  uploaded  by  SysMO  consortium  members.  This  demonstrates a high level of uptake and success in the approach.  

The SEEK offers an off-the-shelf solution to data  management and promotes the 
use of existing metadata standards and ontologies wherever they are available. It does 
not enforce standards-compliance, but it streamlines the process and provides incentives  for  compliance.  The  SEEK  is  a  semantic  web  resources  with  an  interface  that 
meets the requirements and capabilities of its end-user scientists.  

The next step for the SEEK will be to serve the generated RDF as Linked Data, which 
will enable easier federated searching between different SEEK instances and other Life 
Science Linked Data resources. New interfaces to the SPARQL end-point will also be 
developed, to make the writing and use of SPARQL queries more accessible. 

Acknowledgements.  This  work  was  funded  as  part  of  the  SysMO-DB2  grant 
awarded by the BBSRC (BB/I004637/1) and the BNBF grant FKZ:0315781. 
