Using Linked Data to Evaluate the Impact
of Research and Development in Europe:

A Structural Equation Model

Amrapali Zaveri1, Joao Ricardo Nickenig Vissoci2,4,

Cinzia Daraio3, and Ricardo Pietrobon4

1 University of Leipzig, Institute of Computer Science, AKSW Group,

Augustusplatz 10, D-04009 Leipzig, Germany
zaveri@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

2 Medicine Department, Faculdade Ing a, 6114, PR 317 Road, Maring a/PR, Brazil - 87035-510

3 University of Rome La Sapienza, Department of Computer,

http://aksw.org

Control and Management Engineering, Via Ariosto, 25 - I - 00185, Roma - Italy

daraio@dis.uniroma1.it
4 Duke University Medical Center,
{jnv4,rpietro}@duke.edu

Durham, NC, USA

Abstract. Europe has a high impact on the global biomedical literature, having
contributed with a growing number of research articles and a significant citation
impact. However, the impact of research and development generated by European countries on economic, educational and healthcare performance is poorly
understood. The recent Linking Open Data (LOD) project has made a lot of
data sources publicly available and in human-readable formats. In this paper, we
demonstrate the utility of LOD in assessing the impact of Research and Development (R&D) on the economic, education and healthcare performance in Europe.
We extract relevant variables from two LOD datasets, namely World Bank and
Eurostat. We analyze the data for 20 out of the 27 European countries over a
span of 10 years (1999 to 2009). We use a Structural Equation Modeling (SEM)
approach to quantify the impact of R&D on the different measures. We perform
different exploratory and confirmatory factorial analysis evaluations which gives
rise to four latent variables that are included in the model: (i) Research and Development (R&D), (ii) Economic Performance (EcoP), (iii) Educational Performance (EduP), (iv) Healthcare performance (HcareP) of the European countries.
Our results indicate the importance of R&D to the overall development of the
European educational and healthcare performance (directly) and economic performance (indirectly). The results also shows the practical applicability of LOD
to estimate this impact.

1 Introduction

Basic research is a crucial important driver for innovation, economic progress and social
welfare [2,15]. Scientific production concerns especially basic research, but the results
which are generated are not only long-term ones but produce spillovers that have short

H. Alani et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2013, Part II, LNCS 8219, pp. 244259, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
?

?

?
and medium term effects on industrial innovation [24]. Europe, as a whole, has a high
impact on the global biomedical literature, having contributed with a growing number of
articles (210, 433 publications in public health research [23]) and a significant citation
impact [22]. The impact of Europe on broader healthcare and social welfare issues,
however, is poorly understood. Although the credit goes to the university research for
economic impact, there is no consensus on how to measure it [4].

There have been previous projects that focus on measuring similar impact [6,9].
However, these methods have not scaled up to the challenges of multidimensional assessments that is required to measure the overall impact of research and development on
healthcare quality. Moreover, the datasets lack in openness, dynamicity and coverage.
Measuring this impact poses a challenging endeavor which involves the identification,
gathering and analyzing of diverse data. The recent Linking Open Data (LOD) project
offers the possibility to access a large number of datasets in various domains1, which it
possible to quickly extend the breadth of the traditional methods to measure this impact.
Extensions include not only measures of overall impact on healthcare, but also indica-
tors, all mediated through measures of research and development. Thus, the objective
of this paper is twofold: (i) show the feasibility and the usefulness of combining different LOD data-sources to assess the impact of research and development (R&D) on the
economic, educational and healthcare performance, specifically in European countries
and (ii) employ a structural equation modeling approach to assess this impact.

Therefore, we retrieved relevant data from two socio-economic datasets already available as LOD  World Bank and Eurostat. We applied a Structural Equation Modeling
(SEM) approach to combine the variables and quantify the impact based on different measures such as economic, educational and healthcare. Performing different exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis model evaluations gave rise to four latent
variables which were included in the model: (i) Research and Development (R&D), (ii)
Economic Performance (EcoP), (iii) Educational Performance (EduP), (iv) Healthcare
performance (HcareP) of the European countries. The results indicate the importance
of R&D to the overall development of the european educational as well as healthcare
systems (directly) and economic performance (indirectly) and also shows the practical
applicability of LOD in determining this impact.

2 Methodology

In this section, we first describe the extraction process of a series of research and de-
velopment, economic, education, and healthcare-related variables through the use of
Semantic Web technologies (Section 2.1). We then describe initial data analysis performed on the dataset (Section 2.2) followed by the theoretical framework of the model
(Section 2.3). Thereafter, the Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) approach comprising of two steps is described in Section 2.4.

2.1 Data Sources
As the first step, we identified two LOD datasets  the World Bank and Eurostat  from
which all the variables related to healthcare, economic and educational performance

1 http://lod-cloud.net

A. Zaveri et al.

were extracted. Next, we excluded those variables which showed low data quality, that
is mainly those that contained missing values. Thereafter, during the model building
phase, the variables that did not covariate with other variables were omitted resulting in
18 variables that were ultimately included. The respective variables from each of these
datasets and the extraction steps are detailed in this section. Even though traditional
methods of extracting data directly from the datasets website (i.e. manually) was an
option, LOD provided the advantage of identifying relevant datasets as well as specifying and retrieving data easily using SPARQL. That is, with the data available in a
single standardized structured format (RDF) and with the well supported query mechanism (SPARQL), retrieving the relevant data, was less time consuming. Additionally,
this reduced the effort of issuing a different query for each dataset along with the data
comparisons especially vis-a-vis differing units (and strategies to normalize these). The
standardized RDF format also saved the effort of manually handling and combining
different data sheets. Most importantly, extracting data using SPARQL allowed us to
work with a large amount of data. In this paper we only deal with 18 variables, however
LOD can help in gathering larger quantities of variables in the future and from a larger
number of different datasets.
World Bank. The World Bank2 is an international financial institution that collects
and processes large amount of data on the basis of economic models and makes them
openly available3. The World Bank data has been converted and published as LOD.
In particular, the World Development Indicators, which present the most current and
accurate global development data accessible, are available as RDF4.
Variables. From the entire list of the World Development indicators, we specifically
chose the following indicators which helped leverage our model:
 Adolescent fertility rate (Hcare4), which reports the number of births per 1, 000
 Birth rate (GH1), which indicates the crude birth rate i.e. the number of live births
occurring during the year per 1, 000 population. This indicator is estimated at the
middle of the year.
 Death rate (Hcare1), which is the number of crude deaths occurring during the year
 Fertility rate (GH2), which is the total number of children that would be born to a
woman if she were to live to the end of her childbearing years and bear children in
accordance with the current age-specific fertility rates.
 GPD, (Gross Domestic Product) (EcoP1), which is the sum of gross value added
by all resident producers in the economy plus any product taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the value of the product. Data is represented in U.S. dollars.
 Health expenditure public (% of total health expenditure) (RD3) reports the recurrent and capital spending from government (both central as well as local) budgets,
external borrowings and grants and social (or compulsory) health insurance funds.
The total health expenditure is the sum of public and private health expenditure,

per 1, 000 population also estimated at the middle of the year.

women aged 15  19.

2 http://www.worldbank.org/
3 http://data.worldbank.org/
4 http://worldbank.270a.info/classification/indicator.html
?

?

?
which covers the provision of health services as mentioned in the indicator Health
expenditure per capita.
 High-technology exports (% of manufactured exports) (EcoP2) are the products
with high R&D intensity, such as in aerospace, computers, pharmaceuticals, scientific instruments, and electrical machinery.
 Immunization, DPT (% of children ages 12 - 23 months) (Immu1) measures the
percentage of children between the ages of 12 - 23 months who have received vaccinations before 12 months or at any time before the survey. After receiving three
doses of vaccine, a child is considered adequately immunized against diphtheria,
pertussis (or whooping cough), and tetanus (DPT).
 Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12 - 23 months) (Immu2) measures
the percentage of children between the ages of 12 - 23 months who have received
vaccinations before 12 months or at any time before the survey. After receiving one
dose of vaccine, a child is considered adequately immunized against measles.
 Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100, 000 people) (Hcare2) is the estimated number
of new pulmonary, smear positive and extra-pulmonary tuberculosis cases which
also includes patients with HIV.
 Mortality rate, infant (per 1, 000 live births) (Hcare3) is the number of infants dying
 Public spending on education, total (% of government expenditure) (EduP3) reports the total public education expenditure (current and capital) expressed as a
percentage of total government expenditure for all sectors in a given financial year.
This public expenditure on education includes the government spending on educational institutions, both public and private, education administration and subsidies
for private entities such as students or households etc.
 Research and development expenditure (% of GDP) (RD2) reports the expenditures for research and development which are the current and capital expenditures
i.e. both public and private on creative work undertaken systematically to increase
knowledge. This work includes knowledge of humanity, culture, society as well as
the use of knowledge for new applications. R&D covers basic, applied and experimental research and development.
 Researchers in R&D (per million) (RD1) reports the number of professionals engaged in the conception or creation of new knowledge, products, processes, meth-
ods, or systems and in the management of the projects concerned.

before reaching one year of age, per 1, 000 live births in a given year.

Data Extraction. The World Bank data is converted to RDF and available at the SPARQL
endpoint http://worldbank.270a.info/sparql. In order to extract the variables mentioned above, we queried the endpoint using SPARQL5. An example of a
SPARQL query for extraction data of the World Bank indicator Health expenditure
per capita is shown in Listing 1.1. For each of the indicators, the indicator code6 (e.g.
SH.XPD.PCAP) was replaced accordingly. Also, the query was modified to filter results
only pertaining to the years 1999  2009 and for the specific European countries7.
5 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/
6 Obtained from http://worldbank.270a.info/classification/indicator.

html

7 Omitted from the Listing 1.1 due to lack of space.

A. Zaveri et al.
?

?

?
PREFIX g-indicators: <http://worldbank.270a.info/graph/world-development-

indicators>

PREFIX property: <http://worldbank.270a.info/property/>
PREFIX g-meta: <http://worldbank.270a.info/graph/meta>
SELECT ?label ?obsValue
WHERE {

(?refPeriodURI AS ?year)

GRAPH g-indicators:{

?observationURI property:indicator indicator:SH.XPD.PCAP ;

sdmx-dimension:refArea ?refAreaURI ;
sdmx-dimension:refPeriod ?refPeriodURI ;
sdmx-measure:obsValue ?obsValue . }

GRAPH g-meta:{

?refAreaURI a dbo:Country .
?refAreaURI skos:prefLabel ?label . }

} ORDERBY ?label ?refPeriodURI

Listing 1.1. Extraction of the data of the World Bank indicator Health expenditure per capita
using a SPARQL query against the World Bank SPARQL endpoint. Certain prefixes omitted due
to lack of space but can be resolved using http://prefix.cc.

Eurostat. Eurostat8 is the statistical office of the European Union (EU), which provides statistical information to the institutions of the EU in order to to promote the
harmonization of statistical methods across its member states and candidates for accession as well as European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries. Eurostat provides statistical data about various topics such as economy and finance, science and
technology, industry, trade and services, population and social conditions etc.9. The
Eurostat dataset is also converted as part of LOD and is made available at http://
eurostat.linked-statistics.org/.

Variables. From the entire list of different statistics that is provided by Eurostat we
choose the following relevant ones:
 Annual expenditure on public and private educational institutions per pupil/student
(EduP1), which measures the amount which the central, regional and local levels of
government, private households, religious institutions and firms spend per pupil/s-
tudent. It includes expenditure for personnel, other current and capital expenditure.
 Biotechnology patent applications to the EPO by priority year, country and
metropolitan regions (EduP4) reports the number of patent applications specifically
pertaining towards biotechnology to the European Patent Office (EPO). The data is
organized according to the year, country and metropolitan region.
 Economic active population by sex, age and NUTS 2 regions (EcoP3) comprises of
employed as well as unemployed persons and this indicator reports the number of
such persons according to sex and age. NUTS refers to the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics, which divides the economic territory of the EU into different
regions, the NUTS 3 referring to the region for the application of regional policies.
 Financial aid to students (EduP2) reports the amount of financial aid provided to
pupils and students reported as a percentage of the total public expenditure on education for all levels of education combined.

8 http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat
9 http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/

statistics/search_database
?

?

?
Data extraction. The Eurostat data is converted to RDF and available at the SPARQL
endpoint http://eurostat.linked-statistics.org/sparql. Similar to
the extraction of data from World Bank, we used SPARQL to retrieve data for the variables belonging to the Eurostat dataset. An example of a SPARQL query for extraction
data of the Eurostat indicator Biotechnology patent applications to the EPO by priority
year at the national level is shown in Listing 1.2. For each of the indicators, the dataset
code (e.g. pat ep nbio) is replaced accordingly. However, this SPARQL query gave rise
to three values for each country per year for three units:
 http://eurostat.linked-statistics.org/data/pat_ep_nbio#
 http://eurostat.linked-statistics.org/data/pat_ep_nbio#
 http://eurostat.linked-statistics.org/data/pat_ep_nbio#

A,BIO,MIO_ACT,AT,1999

A,BIO,MIO_HAB,AT,1999

A,BIO,NB_TOT,AT,1999

These three values differ in the way in which the value is calculated10 i.e. the number of
inhabitants per million, in this example. The A,BIO,MIO ACT,ACT,1999 was chosen
and included as ?unit in SPARQL query. Additionally, the query was modified to filter
results only pertaining to the years 19992009 and for the specific European countries11.
?

?

?
PREFIX ns: <http://eurostat.linked-statistics.org/property#>
PREFIX dimension: <http://purl.org/linked-data/sdmx/2009/dimension#>
SELECT ?country ?observation ?year
FROM <http://eurostat.org/>

{ ?val

qb:dataSet
sdmx-measure:obsValue
ns:geo
ns:unit
dimension:timePeriod

dataset:pat_ep_nbio ;
?observation ;
?country ;
?unit ;
?year .

FILTER (regex(?unit, "MIO_ACT"))

} ORDER BY ?country

Listing 1.2. Extraction of the data of the Eurostat indicator Biotechnology patent applications
to the EPO by priority year at the national level using a SPARQL query against the Eurostat
SPARQL endpoint. Certain prefixes omitted due to lack of space but can be resolved using
http://prefix.cc.

2.2 Exploratory Data Analysis

Performing exploratory data analysis is essential to analyze the quality of the data to
detect problematic variables, missing values, outliers and other descriptive information about the data to be used. All the information from each of the 18 variables about
each of the 27 European countries covering a span of 10 years (199 to 2009) was retrieved and analyzed. The exploratory data analysis resulted in exclusion of seven countries due to missing information in the 10 year span. Included countries were: Austria,

10 http://timetric.com/search/?q=guadeloupe&n=30&p=10
11 Country codes:http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics

explained/index.php/Glossary:Country codes . Omitted from the Listing 1.1
due to lack of space.

A. Zaveri et al.

Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ire-
land, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden
and the United Kingdom.

In particular, when there was a pattern of missing data (lacking the last three years,
for instance) the country was excluded from the sample. Otherwise, if no pattern was
found a multiple imputation method was applied to deal with the incompleteness [27].
Normality distribution was assessed through the Anderson-Darling normality test [12]
to detect oscillations in the gaussian distribution in order to adjust the analytical methods to the appropriate distribution. We used the Mahalonobis distance [29] to identify
univariate and multivariate outliers and the Mardia coefficient and multivariate kurtosis
to identify multivariate normality [21]. Either univariate or multivariate analysis of the
outliers or normality distribution are determinant to define which underlying methods
(for e.g. extraction) will be applied in the factor analytical process.

2.3 Models Theoretical Framework

The model was initially conceived in order to assess the predictor role of the latent
variable12 Research and Development on the European countries Economy, Education and Healthcare. Specifically, we hypothesized that R&D would have a direct effect
over the Economy (GDP), Educational status (public spending on education), General
Health indicators (birth rate, death rate), Health Outcomes (death rate) including Immunization efforts. The relation between these variables has been separately reported
in a number of studies [4,9,13,18]. Therefore, we gathered a core set of variables (as
described in Section 2.1) related to each of these factors which represented the situation
affecting Europe. However, for our initial model we only kept the data displayed at the
country level, excluding other (although interesting) information at regional level.

2.4 Structural Equation Modeling

Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) [17,20] is a method that has been used in health
sciences [14] economic research [3] as well as education [8] to model causal relations
among latent and observed variables. This method evaluates the relation between latent
variables. For example, in this study we argue that the general concept of economic
performance is only possible to explain through a latent variable specified by other
observed variables such as GPD, average income etc. Hence, we used SEM to test the
outlined hypothesis of a conceptual model based on the effect of R&D on the economic,
educational and healthcare situation of European countries.

Our SEM was tested by the jigsaw method [5]. This procedure expects the adequacy
of the measurement variables (latent variables that will enter the model) into isolated
confirmatory factor analysis models. By doing this measurement before the structural
equations we are able to define the models identification with the latent variables before testing. Therefore a two step strategy is defined to design a SEM [20]: (1) Specify
the latent variables through a sequence of Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) and Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) in a way that an EFA is performed to detect latent

12 Latent variables are those that cannot be measured directly, but is an underlying concept in-

volving other observed variables (variables measured directly).
?

?

?
factors and CFA to confirm its structure. If the latent structure does not show adequate
indicators then re-evaluate the EFA by making a sequence of EFA-CFA-EFA-CFA until
a adequate measurement model is obtained; (2) Specify and identify the SEM based on
the models developed previously by inserting each variable one at a time. The steps we
followed are:

Step 1. The first step in a EFA analysis is to define the extraction13 and rotation meth-
ods14. Once the non-normal distribution of the data was detected, EFA was performed
with Principal Axis extraction method which fits this data distribution better. A Promax
(Oblique) rotation was performed because we believed that the latent variables would
be correlated [7]. The obtained factor loading values15 above 0.30 were considered ac-
ceptable. Models developed by EFA were then tested through CFA sequentially until an
adequate model was obtained.

CFA procedure evaluated the model adjustment and adequacy through fitness indi-
cators, factor loadings and individual item reliability. Weighted Least Square was the
estimation method used, due to non-normal multivariate normality that was obtained.
The indicators used to assess the fitness of the model were: (i) chi-square, (ii) Comparative Fit Index (CFI) (values superior to 0.90 are accepted as adequate fit and 0.95 as
good fit); (iii) Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI) (acceptable fit with values superior to 0.90);
(iv) Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) (values inferior to 0.08 are
considered as acceptable fit and 0.05 as a adequate fit); (v) Akaike Information Crite-
ria/Bayesian Information Criteria (AIC/BIC) (lower values indicate better model when
compared to others) [28,19].

Step 2. SEM was applied to test the hypothetical model using the same indicators
as described in the measurement model evaluation (Step 1) as well as factor loadings
and individual item reliability. The path coefficients were interpreted as: small effect
for loadings <0.10, medium effect for loading until 0.30 and high effect for loadings
>0.50 [20]. Data analysis was performed through R Language Statistical Software 3.0
version[16], with the specific SEM analysis developed with the sem package [10].

3 Results

From the original 27 countries that entered the samples, several were excluded due
to data incompleteness (cf. Section 2.2). Thus, the final sample was constituted by 20
countries. A total of 18 variables (Table 1) were included in the analysis. In this section,
we first describe the results of constructing the parts of the model, in particular, determining the latent and observed variables (Section 3.1). Then, we describe the process
of choosing the best fit for the model to reach the best possible adequacy and theoretical
reasoning (Section 3.2).

13 Extraction method is the statistical approach applied to extract the amount of variance of the

data that is shared by the variables revealing the latent constructs.

14 Rotation technique is used to clarify which variables load into each latent construct.
15 Factor loading is a metric that indicates the amount of contribution of that specific factor to

explain the variance in the observed variable.

A. Zaveri et al.

Table 1. Descriptions and abbreviations used for each of the 18 observed variables belonging to
each of the latent variables of the SEM

Latent variables
Research and
Development (RD)

Observed variables
Researchers in R&D (per million)

Abbreviation

Research and development expenditure (% of GDP)

Health expenditure public (% of total health expenditure)

Economic Performance
(EcoP)

High-technology exports (% of manufactured exports)

Economic active population by sex, age and NUTS 2 re-
gions

Educational
Performance (EduP)

Annual expenditure on public and private educational institutions per pupil/student

Financial aid to students

Public spending on education, total (% of government ex-
penditure)

Biotechnology patent applications to the EPO by priority
year, country and metropolitan regions

General Healthcare
(GH)

Birth rate

Health Outcomes
(Hcare)

Fertility rate

Death rate

Immunization (Immu)

Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100, 000 people)
Mortality rate, infant (per 1, 000 live births)

Adolescent fertility rate
Immunization, DPT (% of children ages 12  23 months)
Immunization, measles (% of children ages 12  23
months)

RD1

RD2

RD3

EcoP1

EcoP2

EcoP3

EduP1

EduP2

EduP3

EduP4

GH1

GH2

Hcare1

Hcare2

Hcare3

Hcare4

Immu1

Immu2

3.1 Latent and Observed Variables

The first step in constructing the SEM was to choose the latent variables that are relevant for the hypothesis. All the variables extracted from the two LOD datasets were
conceptualized theoretically as parts of the constructs of the models theoretical frame-
work. However, in order to develop a latent variable we must assess how the variances
of each variables relates to the existence of an underlying latent factor. Therefore, we
?

?

?
applied a set of EFAs and CFAs to reach the best possible factor structure to apply to
the model [19].

Eigen values and screeplot analysis pointed out for the possibility of four to seven latent factors. Therefore, different EFAs were applied to test for four, five, six and seven
factors structures. The six factor model solution showed better indicators explaining
82% of a variance of the variables in the dataset. However, commonalities indicated
problems with the variables RD3 and EduP3 with values inferior to 0.50, which meant
that these variables were not contributing enough to the latent factor structure specifi-
cation. Nevertheless, we decided to test how the factor structures would fit in the CFA
models with and without both variables.

CFA models were developed for all the six latent constructs, however we had problems in finding convergence in two of the them (GH and Immu). Both latent constructs
had only two observed variables specifying them, which might explain the lack of convergence since the recommendation is to have at least three [19]. Also, variance explanation for both models was lower than 10%. Therefore, we decided to exclude four
observed variables (i) birth rate (GH1) and (ii) fertility rate (GH2) which constituted the
latent variable General Health (GH), and (iii) immunization DPT (Immu1) and (iv) immunization measles (Immu2), which formed the latent variable Immunization (Immu).
Furthermore, the variables health expenditure public (RD3) and public spending on education (EduP3) were influencing the adequacy of their respective CFA models, therefore we excluded them from the analysis. A second EFA was performed for the whole
dataset, now without the four variables mentioned before. This time, eigen values and
screeplot suggested to a three or four factors possibility as shown in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. Screeplot diagram of the variance explained by each factor structure possibility. Vertical
lines represent the 10% up to 90% of variance explained by the factor structures.

Correlation patterns were plotted (Figure 2) to demonstrate the relation among the
variables in order to help identify the better factor solution. EFA results showed that
the four factor structure was able to explain 78% the datasets variance and was the one
with the better factor loading distribution. No variables showed cross-loadings (Fig-
ure 3), that is having a loading weight higher than 0.40 in more than one factor, with a
difference between loadings less than approximately 0.15. Variables with this behavior
tend to refer to more than one latent factor, which might disrupt the specification factor

A. Zaveri et al.

structure of the model. Also, none of the variables showed factor loadings inferior to
0.30, which would indicate that the variables did not relate with any of the latent factors
(Figure 3). Only two variables (Hcare3 and EduP1) had factor loadings between 0.30
and 0.50. They were included in the CFAs as there is evidence in the literature indicating that values higher than 0.30 or 0.40 are deemed acceptable [19]. In summary,
during the model specification phase (step 1) we noticed that some of the observed
variables were not adjusting to latent variables models, which might have influenced
the final SEM. Thus from the initial 18 observed variables we ended up with a model
constituted by 12 observed variables divided into 4 latent variables.

EcoP2

EcoP1

EcoP3

EduP4

RD2

RD1

Hcare4

Hcare3

EduP1

Hcare2

EduP2

Hcare1

.

.

.

.

-

.

-

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
?

?

?
o
c
?

?

?
o
c
?

?

?
o
c
?

?

?
u
d
?

?

?
e
r
a
c

e
r
a
c
?

?

?
u
d

e
r
a
c
?

?

?
u
d

e
r
a
c

Fig. 2. Correlation matrix for the variables with cluster information on the left. Weight of the
coefficients vary from gray (small relation) to black (strong relation).

3.2 Structural Equation Model

Initially we developed a model (Model A, Table 2) with only one exogenous variable
(R&D - causing the effect) and three endogenous variables (EduP, EcoP and Hcare -
receiving the effect). Exogenous variables are those that originate an effect (path-arrow)
to three other variables in the model, while endogenous variables are those that receive
the effect (path). However, this model showed poor fitness indicators (Table 2). and
several highly correlated residuals. In order to improve this models fit we needed to fix
the covariance of errors between variables that would make the model loose its meaning.
Analyzing the residuals behavior directed us to add a secondary path from EduP
and EcoP towards Hcare. This is very precise since healthcare performance is known
to be influenced by the economic situation of the country and the educational performance [13,26]. Thus, the second model (Model B, Table 2) investigated a direct path
from R&D to EduP, EcoP and Hcare, and also a set of paths from EduP and EcoP to
Hcare. This model showed problems in its fit indicators (Table 2). In order to improve
the models specification and fit indicators, we assessed the modification indices which
are indications of the extent of the models fit results that will be improved by adding an
additional path to the model. Modification indices suggested the presence of a covariance between the observed variables that constituted R&D and EcoP, therefore affecting
the models performance.
?

?

?
Fig. 3. Factor structures with factor loadings from one up to six factors possibilities. Connected
lines indicate possible latent factors.

Then, a third model (Model C, Table 2) was tested (Figure 4), drawing a path between Hcare and the observed variable Edup1 and fixing the covariances errors. This
is an interesting relation as it suggests that the healthcare (Hcare) latent construct is
also specified by the amount of investment in education (public and private). Model C
showed was the one with best fitness indicators except for the RMSEA which was above
the proposed cutoff point [28,17]. This model was able to explain variance of EduP in
32.5% and HcareP in 49.5%. However, EcoP had only 3.6% of variance explained by
the model. The fact that the model was not able to predict the variance of EcoP, suggests
that R&D might not be influencing the economic indicators directly as hypothesized.
Moreover, there are several methodological problems that may arise in estimating the
economic returns to public investment in basic research. According to [26], the main
contributions that publicly funded research makes to economic growth are: increasing
the stock of useful knowledge; training skilled graduates; creating new scientific instrumentation and methodologies; forming networks and stimulating social interaction;
increasing the capacity for scientific and technological problem solving and creating
new firms. In [13], the authors state that reviewing the role of education quality in promoting economic growth, conclude that there is strong evidence that cognitive skills are
powerfully related to long-run economic growth. Therefore, it is not surprising then to
observe a low impact of EcoP. In order to see more important impacts we would need
to observe a longer time series.
Path coefficients showed that R&D had moderate to high effect on EduP (0.606)
HcareP (0.511) and small effect on EcoP (0.184). EduP and EcoP also showed small
effects on HcareP (0.150 and 0.056). These values might be understood in the same
meaning as a regression coefficient (although they are not the same), so the value varies
(generally) from 0 to 1, indicating the size of the effect for that specific path. Positive
and negative signs indicate the reciprocity of the relation, thus positive values show
proportional modulation while negative values indicate inverse relations.

Finally a fourth model (Model D,Table 2) was tested, mainly for validation purposes,
in order to show that our model had a better chance of explaining the relations among

A. Zaveri et al.

R&D

Fig. 4. Structural equation model of the influence of Research and Development on the Economic,
Educational and Healthcare performance of EU countries. Values on the arrows connecting latent
variables are the path coefficients and indicate the effects weight. Values on the paths connecting
observed variables and latent variables are factor loadings Values inside the circles are measurement errors associated with endogenous variables, indicating the extent of variance of that
variable that is not explained by the model. Therefore, if the error is high the variable is poorly
explained, in this case EcoP.

the latent variables. This models had EcoP as the main predictor (as an exogenous
variable), R&D as a mediator (endogenous and exogenous) and Hcare and EduP as the
outcomes. The rationale here is that EcoP is the main predictor of the outcomes (Hcare
and EduP) and this effect can be mediated by R&D. However this model did not show a
good fitness indicators and the modifications needed to improve its specification could
not be accepted because they did not demonstrate theoretical coherence. Therefore, we
decided that Model B was the best possible solution to the relations between the latent
variables we developed.

After adjusting and modifying the model to find the best possible fit, and also comparing with a different predictive model possibility we verified that R&D positively influences the educational and healthcare systems in the european countries. This results
support our initial hypothesized model and suggest that the amount expenditure and
personnel in R&D positively influences the educational status in terms of investment,
students aid for science/innovation, and also negatively influences the mortality rate,
tuberculosis incidence and adolescent fertility. Contradicting our hypothesis, R&D did
not directly influence the EU countries economic performance. However this points to
the possibility of other covariants inflicting this models relations enhancing or impairing the effect of R&D over EUs economic development. Finally it is also noteworthy
that healthcare is also dependent on the investment in education, which perhaps points
towards the idea of healthcare coming from educational and social development.
?

?

?
Table 2. CFA Fit Indicators and their respective measurements for all the four models. Model C
is adopted in this study.

CFA Fit
Indicators

AIC/BIC

Model A

Model B

Model C*

Model D

0.771

0.706

0.218

0.802

0.768

0.183

0.923

0.903

0.146

0.835

0.816

0.188

558.73/238.22

529.12/215.05

285.53/-12.40

435.45/118/17

4 Related Work

There have been previous efforts towards utilizing LOD to combine different dataset
and analyzing the impact on various factors related to healthcare and research. In par-
ticular, the ReDD-Observatory project [30] focused towards integrate several datasets
to evaluate the disparity between the amount of research and burden of disease. On the
other hand, the Aquameth project [9] provides a new and systematic characterization of
488 European universities The project utilized several micro indicators built on the integrated Aquameth database to characterize the European university landscape according to the following dimensions: history/foundation of university, dynamics of growth,
specialization pattern, subject mix, funding composition, offer profile and productivity.
Similarly, measurement of the economic impact as well as ranking of universities has
been calculated based on a measurement model that relies on several indicators using
LOD [25]. However, these studies lacked in terms of comprehensive data to derive output indicators for all economic indicators and policy goals. Moreover, for some of the
studies the data was gathered using questionnaires, thus lacking in sufficient amount of
data, and was assessed manually.

Additionally, there are studies that have analyzed the relation between funding by the
NIH (National Institutes of Health) and burden of disease [11]. In Europe especially,
there have been studies to investigate the state of healthcare in the Member States [18].
However, these studies only focused on a particular year as well as gathered data from
a limited number of data sources. Moreover, they faced problems such as the availability and quality of data as well as analysis on a limited number of diseases. Also, the
data procurement was done manually (online survey and face-to-face discussions with
experts) and suffered from incompleteness. Additionally, the Heidi (Health in Europe:
Information and Data Interface) data tool16 presents relevant and comparable information on health at the European level. However, the data is not machine-readable and
is also limited to particular years. Similarly, the Pan American Health Organization
(PAHO)17 of the World Health Organization (WHO) launched the EquiLAC project [1]
which measures the equity in health in emphLatin American and Caribbean region in

16 http://ec.europa.eu/health/indicators/indicators/index_en.htm
17 http://www.paho.org/

A. Zaveri et al.

terms of socio-economic disparities, poor utilization of healthcare etc. In contrast, we
focus on only European countries spanned over a period of 10 years.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we utilize LOD to evaluate the impact of research and development on
economic, educational and healthcare performance particularly in Europe. In particular,
we identified two LOD datasets  World Bank and Eurostat; extracted data about relevant variables using SPARQL and fed the retrieved results into a theoretical framework.
We identified four particular latent variables to verify the impact: (i) Research and Development (R&D), (ii) Economic Performance (EcoP), (iii) Educational Performance
(EduP), (iv) Healthcare performance (HcareP) of the European countries. We used an
SEM approach to perform exploratory factor analysis to calculate the correlation between these four latent variables. After performing analysis using different combinations of the variables, we presented a model that showed to have the best goodness of
fit. The main objective of our analysis is to show the feasibility and the usefulness of
combining different LOD data-sources to assess the impact of R&D by using a structural equation modeling approach. It is beyond the scope of this paper to propose a
final model for the assessment of the impact of R&D on the economic, educational and
healthcare performance in Europe. Further research and additional data are required
to accomplish such an ambitious task. However, the results illustrated the promise of
LOD to be utilized in a variety of ways to perform analysis in different domains. Future
work will involve application of the model for determining the impact for countries all
over the world and over a wider time span. Moreover, we intend to look into ways of
streamlining the process of extracting data directly into R (for e.g. via the SPARQL
package18) and feeding the results automatically into the SEM thus retrieving data from
a larger amount of datasets and variables.
