A Linked-Data-Driven and Semantically-Enabled

Journal Portal for Scientometrics

Yingjie Hu1, Krzysztof Janowicz1, Grant McKenzie1,

Kunal Sengupta2, and Pascal Hitzler2

1 University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA

2 Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA

Abstract. The Semantic Web journal by IOS Press follows a unique
open and transparent process during which each submitted manuscript
is available online together with the full history of its successive decision statuses, assigned editors, solicited and voluntary reviewers, their
full text reviews, and in many cases also the authors response letters.
Combined with a highly-customized, Drupal-based journal management
system, this provides the journal with semantically rich manuscript time
lines and networked data about authors, reviewers, and editors. These
data are now exposed using a SPARQL endpoint, an extended Bibo on-
tology, and a modular Linked Data portal that provides interactive scientometrics based on established and new analysis methods. The portal
can be customized for other journals as well.

Introduction and Motivation

Linked Data is a paradigm for encoding, publishing, and interlinking structured
data in a human and machine readable way to support the use and synthesis of these data outside of their original creation context. Almost all Linked
Data available today come from two sources. Either they are converted from
other forms of structured data such as databases and CSV files, or they are
extracted from semi-structured and non-structured sources such as Web pages.
While LinkedGeoData [1] is a typical example for the first case and is based
on structured content from OpenStreenMap, DBpedia [2] represents the second
case and is based on Wikipedia (originally its tabular content). Today most Web
pages are dynamically created using content management systems that render
content stored in a database using HTML and CSS. The Web presence of the
Semantic Web journal (SWJ) is such a page1.

The journal started in 2010 and is published and printed by IOS Press. The
journals subtitle Interoperability, Usability, Applicability reflects is broad coverage of Semantic Web and Linked Data related research ranging from theoretical
work on description logics and reasoning to applications in various domains
such as the geo-sciences or digital humanities, and also includes topics from
human-computer interaction, e.g., semantically-enabled user interfaces, as well

http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/

H. Alani et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2013, Part II, LNCS 8219, pp. 114129, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
?

?

?
as cognitive science research. More importantly, the journal has a unique feature
in terms of the types of submissions it accepts and especially its review and
editorial process. Besides classical research papers, surveys, application reports,
as well as tools and systems papers, the journal also accepts descriptions of on-
tologies, and since 2012 also (Linked) Dataset descriptions. The SWJ review
process is open and transparent, i.e., all submitted manuscripts are published
on the journals Web page together with the name of the responsible editor, the
names of solicited reviewers, their full text reviews, as well as the decision status
of the manuscript. Authors are also invited to post their reply letters publicly
and any community member can contribute a volunteered review. Solicited reviewers can decide to have their name anonymized but only a minority makes
use of this possibility. While we do not discuss the motivation for setting up
this process and our experience running it here, details can be found in a recent
publication [3].

More interesting for the Semantic Web community is the fact that this process creates a rich dataset that goes far beyond the bibliographic data provided
by publishers. Essentially, it creates a detailed time line for each paper which
contains structured and non-structured data. This provides us with new opportunities for scientometrics to evaluate and analyze scientific works, explore the
network of authors, reviewers, and editors, and try to predict future research
topic trends. Unfortunately, most of this information could not be exploited so
far as it was stored in a closed-source journal management system (msTracker).
Recently, the Semantic Web journal developed several extensions and modifications to the Drupal content management system, to merge its Web presence
with the journal management process [4]. This new system stores all relevant
data in a relational database with normalized database schema and thus allows
to triplify these data; see figure 1.

In this paper, we publish this semantically rich dataset using the principles
of Linked Data and serve those data through a SPARQL endpoint, a Pubby
interface2, and a semantically-enabled Web portal. To capture the submitting-
revising-and-resubmitting process typically experienced by most authors and
their papers, we had to extend the bibliographic ontology BIBO [5], to be able to
encode the different versions of a paper and the corresponding review comments
for these versions in the papers time line. We also created external links to
DBpedia and the Semantic Web Dog Food 3 to enrich our local dataset, as well
as to embed the SWJ dataset into the global Linked Open Data graph.

Based on the published SWJ dataset, a modular Linked Data portal has been
designed and implemented to provide analysis functionality for scientometrics.
A novel user interface has been designed as a middle layer to assist users who are
unfamiliar with SPARQL and Linked Data but want to explore and query the
dataset. Additionally, the SPARQL endpoint is also exposed to the public, and
therefore data engineers can directly interact with the endpoint and integrate
the data in their projects. To incorporate unstructured data such as reviews,

http://wifo5-03.informatik.uni-mannheim.de/pubby/
http://data.semanticweb.org/

Y. Hu et al.

Fig. 1. A paper-page from the new Semantic Web journal management system

abstracts, and the full paper content, we used Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA)
[6] for topic modeling. It is used for simple word-cloud like paper topic visualizations as well as for more complex trending analysis. As all reviews, papers,
and revisions have a time-stamp, we computed LDA topics per period (usually 3
months) to implement research topic trending modules. Descriptive statistics for
each author, such as the number of papers published and the number of papers
reviewed, are also included in this portal, as are information about the authors
network. While the portal has been designed as a combination of a number of
interactive analysis modules, all modules are implemented following the loose
coupling principle, i.e., they can be easily separated, recombined, and integrated
into other systems. This makes the Linked-Data-driven, semantically-enabled
journal portal flexible and reusable. In fact, it will be adopted by a number of
IOS Press journals in the near future.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we introduce the domain of scientometrics in a nutshell. Section 3 describes the SWJ
dataset as well as the process of converting the data into triples and publishing
them as Linked Data. In section 4, we discuss the design and implementation
of the scientometric analysis modules. Next, in section 5, we outline the overall
?

?

?
system architecture and detail how these analysis modules are integrated and are
functioning as a Web portal. Finally, in section 6, we conclude our work and point
out limitations and directions for future work.

2 Scientometrics and Bibliographic Data in a Nutshell

Among the vast number of datasets available on the LOD cloud, several data
hubs, such as DBLP4 and CiteSeer5, have published bibliography data which
provides the potential to reveal networks among researchers, their coauthors, pa-
pers, journals, and conferences. To semantically disambiguate the bibliographic
vocabularies, researchers have developed a number of bibliographic ontologies
to annotate and structure their data [7]. BIBO is one of these bibliographic on-
tologies. In fact, we used it before in Spatial@LinkedScience which serves as a
Linked Data portal for the bibliography data in the field of Geographic Information Science (GIScience) [8].

The term scientometrics was coined by Vassily V. Nalimov in the 1960s, and
refers to the science of measuring and analyzing of science, such as a disciplines
structure, growth, change, and interrelations [9]. While scientometrics often studies the dynamics of a discipline, its methodologies and principles have also been
applied to quantify an individual researchers scientific output [10,11]. The large
amount of bibliographic data available on the LOD Cloud allows new types of
scientometrics. However, the important full text data about the articles are often missing, partially due to copyrights limitations. While there is an increasing
number of open access journals, many of their articles are still not available on
the LOD Cloud. As full texts often play an important role in analyzing research
topics in a scientific discipline [12,13], a lack of such data limits the capacity of
Linked Data to assist scientometric applications. Work related to ours has been
made popular by the ArnetMiner portal [14] which also exports RDF. In contrast to our work, however, ArnetMiner, is restricted to direct bibliographic data
enriched with some author related information. Moreover, while ArnetMiner is
a centralized collection of data, our approach is decentralized and focuses on the
semantic enablement of individual publishers and journals.

The unique review process of SWJ has collected not only bibliographic data
and researcher networks, but also the content of manuscripts, review comments,
as well as the authors responses. Since such data are accessible to the general
public under the open and transparent review process, their Linked Data version
can also be contributed to the LOD Cloud and can be used to promote the
understanding of different scientific research areas, such as the Semantic Web.
With the full text data, text mining methods, such as LDA, can be applied to
extract important topics in an article or a series of articles. When combined with
the time periods, such key topics can also delineate the dynamics and trends of
the research in a scientific area [15,16].

http://datahub.io/dataset/fu-berlin-dblp
http://thedatahub.org/dataset/rkb-explorer-citeseer

Y. Hu et al.

3 Data Publishing and Access

In this section we describe the process of converting the Semantic Web journals
data from the new Drupal system into Resource Description Framework (RDF)
triples. We also discuss extensions to the BIBO ontology and give examples how
to access our data via SPARQL and Pubby.

3.1 Data Source

While we converted most SWJ data to Linked Data, we focus on the data collected by our new journal management system. Data from the old system is less
rich in terms of the available information, especially with respect to revisions
and reviews. For instance, data about reviewers is only available starting from
January 2013. Finally, while we also serve full reviews in RDF and they are
also available on our Web page, for the moment, these Linked Data are access-
restricted. We discussed the difficulties in depublishing Web data before [3]. This
situation becomes even more difficult for Linked Data and we need to study and
understand the implications before releasing this information. This is simply because the degree of availability of Linked Data is orders of magnitude above that
of dynamically generated HTML pages.

Our customized Drupal system treats each submitted manuscript as a node,
and manages all publication data, including abstracts, authors, assigned edi-
tors, reviewers and review comments, the editors decisions, authors responses,
paper categories, as well as PDF URLs, in a MySQL database. In total, this
database contains information about more than 300 unique manuscript submissions since Fall 2010, multiple revisions for most of these manuscripts, about
1000 researchers with author, editor, and reviewer roles assigned to them, full
bibliographic information for all papers, decision statuses, information about
the submission type, assigned editor, PDF documents, public comments, and so
forth. The dataset is constantly growing.

3.2 Converting Data from Relational Database to RDF

The first step to creating a Linked Data version for the SWJ data is to convert
the data from the relational database to RDF triples. Following Linked Data
principles, we employ URIs as identifiers for papers, researchers, and other entities in the data. These URIs are developed using the namespace of the server
(http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/) appended by the name of the entity
(e.g., a papers title or an authors name) with the words connected by hyphens.
This URI convention makes it easy for human users to understand the meaning
of the entities. To reduce the length of URIs for paper entities, stop words, such
as of and on, contained in the paper title have been removed. Paper revisions
are encoded using their underlying Drupal node ID. Meanwhile, we also remove
the diacritical marks (which are contained in some authors names) from the
URIs to avoid potential issues in URI decoding. For reviewers who requested to
remain anonymous during the review process, we use salted MD5 to protect their
?

?

?
privacy while maintaining identity, i.e., there are multiple anonymous reviewer
URIs. Several URI examples are listed below and will lead to a Pubby interface
when opened in a Web browser:

 Author: a researcher whose name is Matthew Rowe

http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/page/matthew-rowe

 Article: A version of Approaches to visualising linked data: A survey

http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/page/node/118

 Submission types: List of all survey articles so far

http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/page/surveyArticle

 Decision status: List of all accepted articles so far

http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/page/accept

With the designed URI convention to identify each entity in the SWJ
database, a set of formal vocabularies is still required to express the entities
relations. The BIBO ontology mentioned before fits many of our requirements.
However, the existing BIBO ontology is unable to express the history of a paper during which the paper was first submitted, then reviewed, sent back for
revision, and then resubmitted, since BIBO is originally designed to capture
bibliographic data about papers that have already been published. To the best
of our knowledge there is no ontology that captures the (internal) workflows of
journals, conferences, and so forth. While a lack of such vocabularies may not
cause much issue when used to express a bibliographic dataset, it does affect
the results for scientometric analysis. For example, almost all papers are revised
at least one time. Thus, a reviewer may need to review the same paper multiple times. Without tracking the history of the paper, the time and effort of the
reviewer could not be distinguished from reviewing the paper just once.

In order to express the submission history of a paper, we extended the BIBO
ontology with an AcademicArticleVersion class which is defined as a subclass
of the Article class in the BIBO ontology. We reuse the hasVersion and isVersionOf relations from the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI) Metadata
Terms6. Two object relations hasPreviousVersion and hasNextVersion, as well
as a datatype property isLatestVersion are further created to capture the relations between a papers different versions. Figure 2 shows how these classes and
relations are configured to encode multiple paper versions.

To capture the author order of a paper, we employ the RDF list properties
recommended by the W3C RDF/XML Syntax Specification7, in which the orders
are expressed as rdf: 1, rdf: 2, rdf: 3, and so forth. Meanwhile, to simplify queries
for the papers of an author (instead of having to know whether he/she is the first
or second author beforehand), we use the creator relation from DCMI terms to
connect each paper with all its authors. Figure 3 shows how these relations are
used to capture the author order information.

Finally, to give a more comprehensive view of the extended BIBO ontology,
figure 4 shows how information about a particular paper is encoded and stored
in our triple store. It shows reviewers, authors, submission types, and so forth.

http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/
http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax/#example17

Y. Hu et al.

Fig. 2. Classes and relations used to express a papers history

Fig. 3. The order of the authors for a paper

Based on the extended BIBO ontology, we developed a customized Java
converter using the OWL API 8. The Java converter reads records from the
SWJ MySQL database, generates RDF triples, and publishes them using
Apache Jenas SPARQL server Fuseki 9. This process has to be repeated regularly to keep the triple store synchronized with the journals data. Once
a paper gets published,
it receives a page number, DOI, volume, and so
forth. This data is imported from the IOS Press server, converted to RDF,
and merged with the existing entities. The SPARQL endpoint is exposed at
http://semantic-web-journal.com:3030/sparql.tpl. A Linked Data interface to the SPARQL endpoint has been created using Pubby10, and can be accessed at http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp. Together this makes the
data readable and accessible by humans and machines. Consequently, the SWJ
data can be queried to arrive at results not directly represented by the portal
described in section 4 below. The following SPARQL query, for example, will

http://owlapi.sourceforge.net/
http://jena.apache.org/documentation/serving_data/

10 Pubby is a Java web application that facilitates the development of a frontend for
Linked Data served through a SPARQL endpoint. Details about Pubby can be found
at http://wifo5-03.informatik.uni-mannheim.de/pubby/
?

?

?
Fig. 4. A comprehensive view of the extended BIBO using a paper as an example (or-
ange ellipses represent classes, blue rectangles represent entities, and white rectangles
represent literals)

show authors of accepted papers that at the same time also edited a paper. This
includes some members of the SWJ editorial boards as well as guest editors from
special issues and their editorials (or regular articles that they published at SWJ
before).

PREFIX rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
PREFIX dc: <http://purl.org/dc/terms/>
PREFIX bibo: <http://purl.org/ontology/bibo/>
PREFIX swj: <http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/>

SELECT distinct ?author
{

?article

?_a

?author;

dc:creator
bibo:status swj:accept.
bibo:editor ?author.

}

4 Analysis Modules

In this section, we provide a brief overview of some of the interactive modules developed for the Linked-Data-driven, semantically-enabled journal portal

Y. Hu et al.

(SEJP) so far. Currently 20 modules have been deployed and new modules are
under development. These modules will also be customized for other IOS Press
journals.

4.1 Statistical Summary Modules

The exposed Linked Data allows us to summarize the work of authors, reviewers,
editors, and the state of the journal as such. Examples include the number of
paper that a researcher has reviewed, a list of her/his of community services
(e.g., conference committee membership), or the acceptance rate of the journal.
To acquire a more comprehensive view about a researcher, as well as to link
out to other data sources on the LOD Cloud, we have created external links to the
Semantic Web Dog Food. SWDF contains information about many researchers
in the Semantic Web community, their papers, and their community services.
With the combination of the two data sources, a researchers information may
look like follows:

swj:researcher swrc:affiliation
swc:holdsRole
terms:isCreatorOf http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/node/204
bibo:isEditorOf
http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/node/108
swj:isReviewerOf http://semantic-web-journal.com/sejp/node/122

http://data.semanticweb.org/organization/uc-santa-barbara
http://data.semanticweb.org/conference/pcmember

Using the combined information, we developed several statistical summary
module. Two of them are shown in Figure 5. In the first case the percentage
of papers per type is displayed. In the second case a radar charts shows the
normalized percentage of a researchers activity with respect to the Semantic
Web journal.

Fig. 5. The submission type and radar chart modules

4.2 TreeMap of Co-authors Module

Most SEJP modules are highly interactive and many of them enrich the
SWJ data with external information. For example, Figure 6 shows a TreeMap
?

?

?
visualization of the co-authors of Frank van Harmelen. Clicking on the universities will show the individual authors with pictures. The size of the colored
fields indicates the number of co-authors from the particular institution. The
module does not only contain SWJ data but collects co-author information
from Microsofts Academic Search API11 and caches them. While the overall
data quality is good, errors in Microsofts identity resolution will also appear
in the TreeMap. The figure also shows a fragment of the general people module which gives access to modules about individual authors, reviewers, and ed-
itors. For instance, the buttons activate a citation map and the radar chart of
activities.

Fig. 6. The SEJP TreeMap module

4.3 Collaborator Network Visualization

The network module is another example. It aggregates data from multiple sources
to visualize relations between researchers and their work. Figure 7 shows a partially expanded and interactive example. It depicts jointly authored papers by
Hitzler and Janowicz, their common co-authors, as well as the papers they edited
for the Semantic Web journal. Clicking on a node will expand the graph and reveal additional information  in this example all titles of papers edited by Hitzler.
The module can, for instance, support editors in detecting conflicts of interest.
The data can also be exploited for sociability analysis as part of scientometrics
as done by ArnetMiner before. Our data, however, provides additional relations
and could be linked to ArnetMiner in the future.

http://academic.research.microsoft.com/

Y. Hu et al.

Fig. 7. Partially expanded network showing joint publications and co-authors

4.4 Geospatial Influence Visualization

Traditional scientometric analysis for individual researchers often focuses on the
number of their publications and citations, and uses numeric values to evaluate
a researchers work, such as the H-index [11]. However, a numeric value may not
be enough. Consider two researchers both having 100 citations for a given paper.
The citations of one researcher are limited within a single country, e.g., the U.S.,
while those for the other researcher are spread throughout the world. By just
looking at the numbers, we may conclude that both papers have similar academic
influence. This, however, hides many interesting spatial aspects, e.g., the detection of hot regions in the geography of science [17], and thus our understanding
of how ideas spread and why scientific communities are often local.

Based on this motivation, we linked the authors in the SWJ dataset with more
general information from Web-based academic search engines. In the current
version the module links authors with the information on Microsoft Academic
Search since it provides more complete profile information. In particular, we are
interested in affiliation of researchers which can be used to geolocate them. How-
ever, in later versions, other academic search engines, such as Google Scholar and
ArnetMiner may also be integrated. Figure 8 shows the spatial (and temporal)
distribution of the citations for a paper of a US-based first-author. The green
symbols indicate places were the paper was cited and the color fades out the
older the citation is. The top citing authors (and their affiliations) are connected
with links and also shown on the right side. For computational reasons only the
first author is considered.
?

?

?
Fig. 8. Visualization of an authors citations

4.5 Hive

The Hive graph module is another example, it visualizes the relationship between
authors, papers, and keywords. Depending on which axis is given priority, the
module will show the papers and keywords associated with authors, the authors
and keywords associated with papers (see figure 9), or the authors and papers
associated with a certain keyword (see figure 10). This powerful exploration tool
can be used to understand what topics are common to most authors, the areas
of expertise of particular authors, the position a certain paper takes within the
research field, and so forth. In the case depicted in figure 10, the mouse is moved
over the keyword axis (the keywords are mined from the fulltexts of all papers)
and the hive chart shows all authors (and papers) that have a strong association
to the (stemmed) keyword ontology.

Fig. 9. The Hive module showing representative keywords for a paper and its au-
thors

Fig. 10. The module showing all authors
(and papers) for a given keyword

5 Architecture and User Interface

In this section, we describe the software framework developed based on the
linked SWJ data and the analysis modules. We discuss the architecture of the

Y. Hu et al.

system, and show how the modules designed in section 4 can be flexibly assembled to form a Web portal. The developed Web portal can be accessed at
http://sejp.semantic-web-journal.net/ and will be constantly extended and updated adding new data and functionality.

5.1 Architecture

The Web portal is constructed based on a client-server architecture which uses
asynchronous JavaScript requests (AJAX) for communication. Figure 11 shows
the overall architecture. The server hosts the published Linked Data and the
analysis modules. Each module is a combination of a JavaScript file, a Java
Servlet, and a set of SPARQL queries (including queries to external data). In
some cases additional data is loaded, e.g., state boundaries in the new TopoJSON
format. These modules can be easily assembled to form a Web portal like the
one shown in this paper. They can also be separated and integrated with other
systems, i.e., they are loosely-coupled. Almost all modules are interactive and
are dynamically updated. More complex queries involving external sources are
cached or pre-computed.

In other words, SEJP provides a growing library of self-contained and interactive JavaScript analysis modules that can be recombined and styled (using CSS)
to develop portals for other journals and conferences. These modules can directly
communicate with the SPARQL endpoint, the stored LDA topics, external geo-
data, and so forth. In the case shown below we use Java Servlets as additional
facades. These Servlets can play multiple roles, e.g., cache data, restrict access,
render more complex visualizations on the server (e.g., for mobile devices), and
so forth.

5.2 User interface

We designed a flexible user interface to demonstrate how the modules jointly
form a portal. The JavaScript framework ExtJS 4.112 has been used to facilitate
the UI development process. More complex modules also make use of the D3 li-
brary.13 In addition to the analysis modules, the user interface also provides data
exploration and key word query functionality. Users unfamiliar with SPARQL
queries can easily use those key word queries to access the data served by the
Web portal.

The user interface shown in figure 12 consists of four major parts. The top
panel shows a grouped drop-down menu which allows the user to load different
modules. Beneath it, the workbench canvas displays the modules and allows the
user to rearrange them in different ways. One of these modules, for instance,
shows the percentage of submitted manuscripts per type. Finally, some modules
group access to other modules. For example, the people module gives access to
modules showing data about authors, reviewers, and editors. It also contains a
search box to find people by name.

http://www.sencha.com/products/extjs
http://d3js.org/
?

?

?
Fig. 11. Basic architecture overview

Fig. 12. Example of an user interface showing the menu bar and multiple overlapping
modules of the Semantic Web journals SEJP installation

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this work, we converted data collected from the Semantic Web journal to
RDF and published them as Linked Data. In addition to the content offered by
traditional bibliographic datasets, our data also contain an entire time line for
each paper together with metadata from SWJs unique open and transparent
review process. This enables novel scientometric applications, insights into scientific networks, allows to study the spread of ideas, discover new trends, and
so forth.

Y. Hu et al.

To capture the information about a papers time line, we extended the BIBO
ontology by allowing a paper to have several versions and by establishing sequential links among these versions. We also added new classes and roles to
model reviewers and their reviews, decision statuses (such as whether a paper is
under major revision), submission types, and so forth. The data are published
via a SPARQL endpoint along with a Pubby Linked Data interface for data
exploration. External links to the Semantic Web Dog Food and DBpedia are
also established, and we make use of the Microsoft Academic Search API as an
additional source of information.

Based on the published data, we exemplarily showcase some of the 20 analysis
modules such TreeMap of collaborators or a Hive plot visualizing the relation
between authors, papers, and areas of expertise. The SEJP modules can used
for multiple tasks such as finding suitable reviewers, browsing for potential coauthors and papers of interest, or exploring research trends by mining for latent
topics in recently submitted manuscripts. Several of the developed modules also
take a spatial perspective and provide users with insights about spatial citations patterns and the distribution of research interests. Finally, those interactive modules were made accessible via a Web-based user interface. The interface
is developed in a workbench-style, i.e., different modules can be loaded at the
same time and arranged to support multiple perspectives on the same data.

In the future, we plan to add additional modules, provide more complex interaction techniques, links between the different modules, and integrate more data
sources. In terms of analysis, we will especially focus on research trending, e.g.,
to understand the dynamics of a discipline or an individual researcher. The presented deployment of SEJP to the Semantic Web journal is just the beginning.
In the near future the portal will be used by other IOS Press journals (based on
the data they provide) as well. Finally, by contributing the SWJ dataset to the
Linked Data cloud, we hope to further open up scientific review processes, make
them more transparent, and document the research field.
