Utilising Provenance to Enhance Social

Computation

Milan Markovic, Peter Edwards, and David Corsar

Computing Science & dot.rural Digital Economy Hub, University of Aberdeen,

{m.markovic,p.edwards,dcorsar}@abdn.ac.uk

Aberdeen, AB24 5UA

Abstract. Many online platforms employ networks of human workers
to perform computational tasks that can be difficult for a machine (e.g.
reporting travel disruption). Such systems have to make a range of deci-
sions, for example, selection of suitable workers for a task. In this paper
we present an approach that utilises Semantic Web technologies and
provenance to support such decision-making processes.

Introduction

Recent years have seen the emergence of several web-based platforms1 that use
collective intelligence, i.e. groups of individuals doing things collectively that
seem intelligent [4]. Within such platforms, workers are recruited to perform
computational tasks, such as data creation or data maintenance.

Robertson and Giunchiglia define one such approach, a social computation
(SC) as: a computation for which an executable specification exists, but the
successful implementation of this specification depends upon computer-mediated
social interaction between the human actors in its implementation[11]. Figure 1
illustrates a specification for a simple scenario that gathers reports about travel
disruptions from workers (e.g. via a smartphone app). Workers can either provide the report themselves or delegate this task to other workers in their social
network. When designing the specification, it can be associated with social properties that define: the drivers for the adoption and spread of the computation
through the social group with which it engages [11]. For example, a social property for our scenario could be: to secure a reward, a worker has to provide a
report himself or refer the task to someone in his social network that can provide
a report2.

The use of humans in SC can result in issues related to the reliability of
workers, workforce recruitment (i.e. ensuring the most suitable people are used),

 The research described here is supported by the award made by the RCUK Digital Economy programme to the dot.rural Digital Economy Hub; award reference:
EP/G066051/1.

1 Examples include: Amazons Mechanical Turk (www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome),

Zooniverse (www.zooniverse.org/); Crowdflower (www.crowdflower.com/).

2 If the second worker further delegates the task, the first worker will not receive a

reward.

H. Alani et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2013, Part II, LNCS 8219, pp. 440447, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
?

?

?
...

x

P'

Report 
Disruption

Delegate 
a Friend

...

...

...

S'
S'S'

Report a travel 

disruption in 
Aberdeen, UK

Disruption 

Report

Workforce 
Selection

x

A Aggregate

Individual 
Decision

Fig. 1. An SC specification for travel disruption reporting, described using the CrowdLang [5] notation. A problem statement (P), i.e. to create a report of travel disruption
in Aberdeen, UK, is distributed by a workforce selection process (WS) to a number
of workers each receiving P. Each individual worker decides (ID) whether they can
contribute a solution by creating a report (S), or by delegating the task to a friend. All
individual solutions (S) are aggregated into a set of solutions (S) containing reports
of all the travel disruptions in Aberdeen.

and evaluating quality of generated results. To address these issues it is necessary
to guide various reasoning about the operation of such systems. We argue that
this reasoning can be supported by recording the provenance of SC execution
(i.e. what happened during the execution) as this will increase its transparency.
For example, such a provenance record can enable the system to reason about:
workers motives (e.g. to receive a reward); the steps that were taken in the
process of the execution (e.g. delegation of a task to a friend); and which worker
performed each part of the computation. Figure 2 shows a provenance record
that could be generated during the execution of the SC outlined in the grey area
of Figure 1. This describes the activities performed throughout the computation
(e.g. delegating the task to a friend), and the agents (Peter and Bob) associated
with those activities. Furthermore, linking to the SC executable specification in
the provenance record will provide access to the associated social properties. We
anticipate that parts of this provenance information (e.g. the elements in Figure 2
with single solid line) can be described using a generic provenance model such as
the Prov-DM3, the W3C recommendation. However, we argue that such a record
should also include information about workers attributes, such as motivations,
skills and capabilities (their means or ability to apply skills) at the time of the
task execution. At this stage, it is unclear how these should be represented using
existing provenance models. Linking to the social properties allows monitoring
of the system to ensure the behaviours associated with the specification actually
occurred during the execution. We argue that recording the provenance of a SC
in this way using Semantic Web technologies will enable enhanced, automated
decision-making processes that consider, for example, workers past activities,
motivation and capabilities, and their compliance with social properties.

www.w3.org/TR/prov-dm/

M. Markovic, P. Edwards, and D. Corsar

Workforce 
Selection

used

hadProblem 

Problem

"report a disruption in 

Aberdeen"

Executable 
Specification

associatedWith 

hadSocialProperty 

Social 
Property
"reward  

requirements"

delegatedBy 

used

Peter

Skill

"create a report"

Motive

"help a friend"

had 

Skill

"create a 
report"

influencedBy 

associatedWith 
Delegation 
Activity

delegatedBy 

motivatedBy 

motivatedBy 
Motive
"collect a 
reward"

had

motivatedBy 

had 

Bob

GeneratedBy

Capabilities
"located in 
Aberdeen"

Solution
"disruption 

report"

Causal Links known how to represent using Prov-DM

Elements known how to represent using Prov-DM

Causal Links currently unclear how to represent using Prov-DM

Elements currently unclear how to represent using Prov-DM

Fig. 2. An example provenance record describing the process of workforce selection
and a workers subsequent delegation to a friend. In this example Peter was selected to
perform the task of creating a disruption report in Aberdeen, UK. A social property
(defined earlier) influenced Peters motive to delegate his friend Bob, who lived in
Aberdeen. Peter motivated his friend to provide a solution.

The remainder of this paper outlines the research problem and its relevance
to the Semantic Web community. We then discuss related work, our hypothesis,
research questions, approach to answering those questions, and evaluation plans.

1.1 Problem Statement

We are exploring the suitability of current provenance models, such as Prov-DM
and Open Provenance Model (OPM)4, in the context of SC. For example, can
these models capture all the elements of a SC (e.g. capabilities, motives, social
properties) or are extensions required to capture them? How can provenance
be used in automated decision-making processes such as workforce selection?
A provenance model would be required to describe what happened during the
execution, and be able to represent the executable specification to allow it to
be referenced by the provenance record. The investigation of these issues will
involve designing a provenance model that meets these requirements. To explore
the benefits of using provenance in automated decision-making (e.g. reducing
time or costs of SC), we will investigate how provenance can support two key
processes, namely the assessment of workers trustworthiness and workforce se-
lection. For this purpose, we consider trustworthiness as an attribute associated
with a worker that describes assurances such as reputation, or skill level. The
results of trust assessments can be used as part of workforce selection. How-
ever, such decisions must also rank workers based on trust and match them to
a specific task within a SC.

1.2 Relevance

Hendler and Berners-Lee [3] previously noted the fundamental role of Semantic
Web technologies in supporting systems driven by SC. They also argue that

www.openprovenance.org/
?

?

?
these systems are currently limited as their functions are largely isolated from
one another as, for example, they are unable to easily share data. Semantic
Web technologies provide the means to describe structured, machine-readable
data, its semantics via ontologies, and to support automated reasoning (e.g.
to identify suitable workers based on their skills and previous contributions).
Therefore, such technology offers a potential solution when addressing those
issues. We argue that the application of Linked Data Principles5 to publishing
the provenance of a SC would enable the provenance record to be integrated with
both, provenance records from other systems and datasets published as Linked
Data. This in turn, provides additional information that can be used to further
support automated decision-making.

2 Related Work

Robertson and Giunchiglias definition of SC (Section 1) is similar to the concept
of a workflow, which can be defined as: a collection of coordinated activities
designed to carry out a well-defined complex process[8]. Activities in such a
workflow can be executed by a human or a machine. However, the majority of
research on workflows has focussed on processes involving computational ser-
vices, and only recently has attention been paid to human-driven processes in a
workflow setting. For example, the Crowdlang programming framework [5] aims
to support the design process associated with a range of SC systems by specifying their abstract workflow descriptions. The framework, however, does not
feature ability to model workers and attributes associated with them.

Schall et. al. [12] propose an extension to a service-oriented execution language
BPEL4People6 to accommodate non-functional attributes of workers, such as
capabilities and skill level. Further, Schall et. al. use social network analysis to
identify three roles that humans can undertake. These are: workers, supervisors
(leaders responsible for managing tasks allocated to a group of workers), and
coordinators (who form the interface between task requesters that initiate the SC
and supervisors). In their approach, Shall et. al. combine these non-functional
attributes and use of social network structure to inform novel approaches to
automated task allocation for a social group. Difallah et.al. [2] also describe
an approach to allocation of categorized tasks to workers based on their social
network activities. Difallah et.al. utilise document-based ranking mechanisms by
searching for keywords relevant to a particular category topic in documents that
worker tagged as of interest to them on, for example, Facebook [2].

Provenance has also been highlighted as having a role in trust assessment of
agents [7,10]. These are commonly based on considering an agents reputation
and quality of service. Here, provenance provides additional contextual information that is particularly important when performing trust assessments on, for
example, conflicting data or data of unknown origin [10].

http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
http://docs.oasis-open.org/bpel4people/bpel4people-1.1-spec-cd-06.pdf

M. Markovic, P. Edwards, and D. Corsar

While provenance has received significant interest from the workflow commu-
nity, however, some limitations of existing provenance models when applied to
workflows have been identified. Missier et al. [6] addressed a limitation of ProvDM in modelling a process structure (i.e. the exact steps that were performed
during an activity7 execution) in scientific workflows. They proposed the D-Prov
extension to Prov-DM, enabling the description of sub-activities of an activity.
Pignotti et al. [9] highlighted the importance of capturing constraints and goals
(e.g. intent) of an agent controlling a process in a scientific workflow. They have
extended OPM and developed their extensions ontological realisation.

Our approach builds on existing work and proposes the use of provenance
to support automated trust assessments of workers and workforce selection. A
provenance record provides a novel way of obtaining information that can be
used to inform decision-making in SC. In addition, our approach provides the
ability to assess workers on new, previously unrecorded information, such as
social properties. Recording provenance as linked data improves the reusability
of such information and enables the integration of provenance records from other
systems. This increases the amount of information available to decision-making
processes in SC.

3 Hypothesis

In Section 1 we introduced our plan to investigate provenance in the SC context.
To frame our research we have formulated following hypothesis:

Recording the provenance of a social computation can inform decisionmaking processes about aspects of that and future social computations.
Evaluation of this hypothesis will involve realising a provenance model that is
capable of capturing the provenance of a SC and its use in a SC system. Addition-
ally, the provenance will be used to inform automated workforce selection and
trust assessments of workers to demonstrate the use of provenance in decisionmaking associated with SC.

3.1 Research Questions

We have identified five research questions related to our hypothesis. Q1: What
are the requirements for capturing the provenance of a SC? SC integrates humans as part of a wider computational process and relies on various
social properties, which affect this computation. We will investigate if the requirements for provenance of a SC execution differ from those of existing provenance models. Q2: Can a provenance model be developed in order to
satisfy these requirements? Satisfying the requirements identified in Q1 using an abstract formal model will provide means for its ontological realisation.
Q3: Can a framework be realised to demonstrate the practical utilisation of this model? This investigates the implementation of a computational

7 Prov-DM notation for a high level description of a process.
?

?

?
framework to capture the provenance of a SC using the provenance model from
Q2. Q4: How can the provenance of a SC be used to support trust
assessments of workers? We will explore how the provenance record of a SC
can inform reasoning about a workers trustworthiness to perform a task. This
will include information such as, past interactions with the system (workers
reputation) and associated contextual information (e.g. to determine workers
motivation). Q5: How can the provenance of a SC be used to guide
workforce selection? We will investigate how the attributes of a worker extracted from provenance records of previous SCs can be used to determine a
suitable worker for a particular task within an executable specification.

4 Approach

To address our research questions, we will first produce and analyse a series of
use cases8 to determine the requirements for provenance in SC. The structure
of use cases follows the template format of W3C Provenance Incubator Group9
and includes: background and current practices, description of related provenance dimensions10, goals, use case scenario, and problems and limitations in
achieving goals defined by the use case. The aim is to identify a set of requirements for provenance in SC that can be compared to the requirements satisfied
by existing provenance models. In cases where existing models do not satisfy
our requirements, we will determine and define the necessary extensions. The
new provenance model will be realised in an ontology that will be used to record
provenance in a computational framework we will develop to evaluate our hy-
pothesis. This framework will operate on top of existing SC platforms, such as
CrowdFlower, or custom built applications (e.g. a travel disruption app), capturing and facilitating the use of provenance in these environments. To date, we
have built a simple framework that consists of a number of RESTful services providing functionality for data retrieval, creation, and maintenance for the travel
disruption app. Data is stored in a triple store and accessed via a SPARQL11
endpoint.

Further, we will design models for trust assessment and workforce selection,
based on existing work with the incorporation of additional attributes captured
in a provenance record. The trust model, will utilise the agents motivation (e.g.
to receive a reward) captured during previous task to predict their future behaviours in similar tasks. For example, trusting a worker that previously provided
a solution or delegated a friend who provided a solution. In addition, we plan to
explore the capabilities of D-Prov (discussed in Section 2) to better document

8 To the date we have identified the following use cases: compliance with SC executable specification, assessing social properties, generation of worker profiles, capturing worker capabilities, capturing worker motivation, capturing task execution,
and identifying workers roles
http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/prov/wiki/Use_Case_Template
http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/prov/wiki/Provenance_Dimensions
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/

M. Markovic, P. Edwards, and D. Corsar

how a worker performed a task. Such information can be used, for example, to
calculate workers reputation (e.g. their compliance with the expected behaviours
of the executable specification). In terms of workforce selection, we will design
mechanisms to classify the different roles (such as those identified by Shall et.
al. [12]) workers can undertake during the computation based on their previous
behaviours. The workforce selection model will also feature a ranking mechanism of workers based on previous research in the expert finding domain [1]. We
will start by exploring two common approaches: candidate-based and document-
based. In the first approach, profiles of experts (e.g. workers) are constructed and
used to rank the suitability of workers for a given task. The second approach
ranks the documents (e.g. tasks described in relevant provenance records) given
the query (e.g. a request containing keywords describing the topic a desired expert is sought for) and then infers the relationships between experts and those
documents [2,1]. We will explore the possibility of searching provenance records
(e.g. matching a current task to provenance records featuring agents performing similar tasks). We will investigate how information about worker attributes
captured in these provenance records can be used to determine relationships between those workers and their level of expertise for a particular task. Finally, we
will implement trust assessments and workforce selection processes within our
framework.

4.1 Reflections

The approach described in this paper addresses the issues relating to the capture
and use of provenance of a SC in such a way that would be beneficial to adminis-
trators, data consumers, and workers in SC systems. If the approach is successful,
our framework can be used to develop new techniques for managing data and
workers within such systems. We have outlined our intentions to build on previous research in areas of provenance, workforce selection, and trust assessment. If
unsuccessful, our research will identify challenges (practical or theoretical) that
need to be addressed before such an approach becomes possible.

5 Evaluation

To evaluate our hypothesis we will first use our provenance model to determine
if provenance of SC execution can be captured theoretically (e.g. by applying
to a use case scenario). The provenance framework (Section 4) will be used to
evaluate the practical implementation of this model. The framework will be used
to capture provenance for a number of experimental SC executions. If successful,
this will show that provenance can be captured for the execution of SCs. Further,
analysis of the generated provenance records will provide an understanding of
the characteristics of SC provenance (e.g. record contains lots of activities but
very few motivations).

We will then design experiments to evaluate the support provided by the
trust assessment and workforce selection processes. Initially, SCs will be executed
?

?

?
repeatedly, without any decision-making support. The SCs will then be repeated
with the decision-making support. Evaluating the utility of the support will
include comparison of quantitative figures (e.g. number of participants, time
required to complete the task) and qualitative analyses of the generated results
(i.e. a result generated without the support is similar or equivalent to a result
generated with the support). We expect to demonstrate that computations with
the decision-making support will show differences in the amount of workers,
time, and reward required to motivate workers, while preserving or improving
the standard of the results.
