 

The Effects of Licensing on Open Data: 

Computing a Measure of Health for Our Scholarly Record 

Richard Hosking and Mark Gahegan 

University of Auckland, Department of Computer Science and Centre for eResearch,  

Building 409, Rm G21, LG, 24 Symonds Street,  

Auckland, New Zealand 

{r.hosking,m.gahegan}@auckland.ac.nz 

Abstract.  As  data  collections  become  established  in  key  disciplines,  some  of 
the longstanding barriers to data sharing become to dissolve; yet others remain.  
While metadata and ontologies help overcome the problems of finding and interpreting data, the lack of clarity over licensing remains a real impediment to 
data reuse.  Freedom from legal restriction and uncertainty is essential for the 
effective sharing, combining and deriving of data from these distributed collec-
tions. Reuse and recombination of data will be greatly facilitated by expanding 
the  definition  of  the  semantic  web  to  include  the  semantics  of  data  licensing. 
We aim to express licensing terms in a computable manner, within the context 
of research practice, enabling us to infer the resulting state of rights, obligations 
and  conditions  that  are  inherited  by  derived  and  recombined datasets,  using  a 
mixed bag of licenses. Building off this we aim to simulate the effects of varying  licensing  practices  within  communities,  proposing  a  measure  of  health  of 
our scholarly record based on compatibility and restrictiveness of the licenses 
contained therein. 

Introduction 

The  semantic  web  has  brought  untold  opportunities  to  share  and  reuse  data.  In  this 
research  we address an uncertainty in data reuse and recombination. Expressing the 
terms  and  conditions  of  use  through  data  licenses  guides  allowable  usage,  but  even 
the use of prominent licenses, such as Creative Commons [1] and GPL [2] can surface 
incompatibilities that would hamper certain data combinations. We develop a semantic model to describe data licenses, allowing us to compute the impacts of licensing 
decisions on integrating the scientific record, especially on the derivation of new data 
from existing datasets. For instance,  what  would be the resulting state of rights and 
obligations  from combining two related data sets  with different underlying licenses, 
or  deriving  new  data  by  querying  an  existing  distributed  collection?  The  resulting 
restrictions stem from two related but distinguishable forces: (i) The explicit terms or 
reserved  rights  placed  on  data  content,  and  (ii)  incompatible  licensing  conditions 
across  content.  Automated  computational  tools  are  bringing  this  problem  into  sharp 
focus; for example, data mining a corpus [3] of heterogeneously licensed work, or a 
large  data  integration  effort  such  as  creating  global  land  cover  maps  from  many  

H. Alani et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2013, Part II, LNCS 8219, pp. 432439, 2013. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
?

?

?
national  maps  [4,  5].  We  currently  have  limited  means  of  measuring  our  collective 
freedom  to  integrate  and  republish  our  scientific  record  [6];  Lacking  an  effective 
means  of  expressing  licensing  terms  that  are  semantically  computable  hinders  our 
ability to efficiently and effectively reason over the legality of our research practices 
and products.   

Relevancy 

We require new measures of the health of our research data, both as individual enti-
ties, and as an interdependent ecosystem. The culture shift towards open access and 
open licensing provide momentum and direction towards a more integrated scientific 
record. However, there has been little attention paid so far to the effect that data licensing plays in complicating or inhibiting the reuse and recombination of data; the 
work of Wilbanks [6,7] being a notable exception. Providing useful answers presents 
many challenges, such as classifying data by permissible uses, through to determining 
the resulting legality of deriving new data from our current records, and subsequently 
the limitations that the  new dataset  will carry. Data portals, repositories and collections play an essential role disseminating scholarly data, but to what extent are enforcing  open  licensing  ideals  on  data  ingress  ostracizing  valuable  data?  To  aid  with 
these questions, we require better measurements: Firstly to gain greater understanding 
of the challenge, and secondly  to act as an essential resource guiding collective governance over these issues. 

In this research we focus on the human imposed restrictions and obligations placed 
on scientific data in its contemporary digital form. We present this control as inertia, 
reducing or even preventing reuse. The prevailing position of Copyright Law, and the 
individual and combined effects of licensing provide the source of restrictions. With 
uncertainty stemming  from both ambiguities in these terms and the novel usage demanded  from  scientific  research.  To  bring  about  effective  sharing  and  reuse  of  the 
scholarly record we need to address this burden of control and restrictions. From the 
standpoint of the semantic web, this research contributes a novel application of ontological reasoning, provides simulation tools to explore the effects of combining data 
that uses a variety of license types, and therefore supports the notion of an open web 
of linked data that is free from legal risk.  

Related Work 

The moral and pragmatic imperatives for fostering a more open and reusable scientific record have been well made [68]; our legal tools are also advancing to meet our 
evolving  conceptualization  of  openness.  The  Free  Software  Movements  [2]  virally 
open licenseschallenging  the closed and proprietary  model of software develop-
mentincludes explicit provisions that derived works must also carry similar affordances [9]. This particular approach of propagating values brought with it a cultural 
movement. With the advent of the Creative Commons family of licenses [1] we observe a shift towards the public domain, bringing a much-simplified licensing model 

R. Hosking and M. Gahegan 

while also employing the use of graphical notations to improve clarity. Some affordances  of  control  remain  for  authors,  such  as  preventing  commercial  use,  and
borrowing from the Free Software Movementthe share-alike clause, to allow propagating  of  intent  to  derivative  works.  Most  recently  the  legal  commitment  to  the 
commons was strengthened with the creation of waivers [10, 11] designed to release 
(to  the  fullest  extent  possible  under  the  law)  all  conditions  and  reserved  rights  on 
content. This provides a useful baseline and its difficult to envision a situation that 
provides more freedom at scale.  

Rights Expression Languages provide formal  machine-readable expressions of li-
censes, MPEG-21[12] and the Open Digital Rights Language (ODRL)[13] being the 
most prominent. In creating  these representations,  we  have learnt the  importance of 
understanding content lifecycles, granularity, ambiguity, extensibility and choosing an 
appropriate formal language for these representations [3, 14, 15]. We observe a trend 
towards  standardized  formats.  For  example  the  original  right  expression  language, 
DPRL [16], was written in LISP [17] but subsequently (following its standardization 
by  the  W3C)  migrated  to  XML  DTD  [18],  then  XML  Schema  [19].  Then  Creative 
Commons  developed  its  own  machine-readable  expression  language  (ccREL)  [20] 
opting to use RDF [21]. A distinguishing point in these expression languages is the 
role of machine-actionable control over use of the content; ccREL relies on the existing copyright law to protect digital content, MPEG and ODRL providing integration 
to  enforcement  systems.  In  order  to  connect  the  CC  licenses  to  copyright  law,  the 
Creative  Commons  initiative  created  a  set  of  human-readable  "classical"  licenses. 
These licenses are also available as summarized, and graphical notation, for users not 
interested in the legal text.  

Aside  from  Creative  Commons  (ccREL),  there  is  a  distinct  lack  of  support  for 
Copyright law in these representations [14, 22]. Soft rights such as fair use are difficult to encode in rights languages due to their ambiguous nature. Most existing Rights 
Expression  Languages  take  the  Everything  not  permitted  is  forbidden  approach, 
while ccREL uses the Berne convention [23] as a baseline, permitting any action this 
is not explicitly stated, such as NonCommercial or NoDerivative. Interoperability 
concerns, and the lack of support for Copyright law drove the development of Copyright Ontologies: The Semantic Copyright project [24], and the Copyright Ontology 
[15]  respectively.  Spurred  by  the  goals  of  supporting  an  Intellectual  Property  Regi-
stry, the Semantic Copyright projects provides rich representation for the attributes of 
work, and even supports basic reasoning over allowable uses, limited by only capturing  basic  rights.  The  Copyright  Ontology  was  designed  to  extend  notions  of  Copyright Law to existing rights expression languages, providing a layer of interoperability 
and  the  promise  of  web  standards. The  approach  relied  heavily  on  the  subsumption 
capabilities of OWL-DL, but could only capture the expression and transfer of rights, 
neglecting obligations and conditions. Additionally, its strict interpretation of Copyright law does not address the diversity and potential misalignment between terms of 
various licenses. Both these efforts explicitly exclude cross-jurisdictional issues,  yet 
data licenses often suffer  from these ambiguities. Lastly  neither of these efforts  has 
attempted to compute the resulting state of rights and obligations on derivative works. 

Research Questions 

The Effects of Licensing on Open Data 

There exists a rich discussion on the role licensing plays on our research data [3,6,7] 
(and even richer examples of it being reused [8]), however there exists a disconnection between these discussions, the current means of expressing licensing terms and 
measuring the impacts on research practice. Without this our tools will remain ignorant of the social context in which they exist. We aim to answer the following: 
 

1)  How can data licensing be expressed semantically to include the rich inter-

pretative discussion, and its relationship to research practice? 

 
Data-driven research [8] is premised on the availability of quality data, with combing 
and deriving this data a fundamental activity of successful research. But faced  with 
interpreting  licensing  constraints  on  performing  these  common  tasks,  it  is  often  unclear in terms of both the permissibility of undertaking a given action, and the propagating state of rights and obligations to the result. Faced with this, we aim to answer:  
 

2)  How can we compute the resulting state of rights, obligations and conditions 
associated  with  derived  data,  particularly  when  multiple  license  types  are 
implied? 

 
Individual actions do not occur within a vacuum, nor in the case of licensing are they 
immutable.  The  move  towards  open  access  means  practices  and  community  norms 
need  to  change.  Effective  change  relies  on  constructive  discussions  based  on  the 
availability of knowledge. We aim to address the lack of congruency within and between data hosting communities. 
 

3)  Can we compute a health measure based on #1 and #2 to describe how combinable (distributed) community datasets might be, based on their licensing? 

Hypotheses 

Licensing  norms  will  differ  between  communities,  with  some  practices  being  more 
advantageous. Thus the impact of licensing on research practices will vary. Towards 
the aim of computing a measure of health we develop measures that allow us to assess 
legal aspects of openness both within and between communities. We put forward the 
following to serve as a basis for creating these measurements:  

  An increased number of licensing conditions will decrease reusability and / 

or increase legal uncertainty 

  A greater diversity of licensing terms across a corpus will decrease the ag-

 
 

gregate level of reuse 
Increased use of non-standard terms will increase legal uncertainty 
Increased restrictions and conditions on a dataset will decrease its ability to 
be integrated into existing workflows and collections 

R. Hosking and M. Gahegan 

Thus, given our ability to compute over individual licensing implications, we put 
forward the following dimensions as meaningful measures to evaluate the health of a 
collection of scholarly data: 

 

 

 

 Uniformity:  A  measure  of  the  degree  and  distribution  of  different  legal 
affordances of a collection 
 Combinability: The extent of interoperability between the licensing conditions placed across a collection 
 Level of clarity: A measure of the legal uncertainty that underlies the use 
and combination of the collection 

The quality of this model will be judged on its ability, given a collection with differing  underlying licenses, to generate these  meaningful  measures that  facilitate understanding and enable comparison between licensing practices. 

Approach 

Collectively  this  research  contributes  to  two  aims,  firstly  to  capture,  compute  and 
usefully convey the practical effects of licensing on our research data, and secondly 
demonstrate  the  value  of  this  by  developing  a  measure  of  health  for  our  scholarly 
record that will, we believe, help in the pursuit of best practice policies to encourage 
data reuse. 

6.1  Conceptualization 

In creating a rich representation of this domain, we must first ask: 

i.  How diverse is the terminology commonly used to license data, and how 

can these semantics be formally captured? 

ii.  What are the relationships between the terms used in data licensing and 

undertaking common research activities that operate on the data? 

iii.  How in practice do the conditions, obligations and rights combine when 

we derive new data? 

iv.  How can we compare licensing practices between communities? 

1.  We  will  firstly  undertake  a  review  of  the  discussions  and  observations 
around data licensing. This will provide a rich comprehension of the effects 
of  various  licenses  aiding  our  interpretation  of  the  meaning  and  impact  of 
these terms. 

2.  Next we conceptualize a model of data usage in the sciences, primarily focusing on commonly used verbs. Understanding will be drawn from existing 
workflow and lifecycle models, along with analytical methods and phrases in 
common use.  

 

 

 

 
?

?

?
3.  We will then model the most prominently used data licenses and a selection 
of commonly applied custom terms. Undertaking a matching exercise[25] we 
will then relate the terms and conditions of these licenses to each other and 
research actions. 

4.  Following,  we  will  model  licensing  practices  across  several  communities 
within the Earth and Environmental Sciences, and in parallel generate synthetic  data  collections  that  caricature  various  licensing  strategies.  Together 
this will enable us to simulate the resulting effects of combining and deriving 
data. 

6.2 

Formalization 

In creating a computable formalism we aim to ascertain: 

i. 
ii. 

iii. 

the legality of performing research actions; 
the compounding affects of related licensing terms, and the union of multiple 
licenses and 
the sets of data we are able to effectively integrate or work with for a specified purpose. 

 

 

 

1.  We  will  formalize  our  conceptual  model  into  the  Web  Ontology  Language 
(OWL). The level of expressivity will be determined by the requirement to 
reason over the legality of research actions that involve data under license.  

2.  Particular  focus  will  then  be  placed  on  research  actions  that  result  in  the 
creation  of  new  data,  especially  derived  works  resulting  from  multiple 
sources.  Here  we  aim  to  compute  the  resulting  state  of:  rights,  restrictions 
and obligations. 

3.  We will then develop an agent-based model. This will allow us to simulate 
the  emergent  affects  of  licensing  over  time,  with  a  focus  on  understanding 
the propagating rights on derived data. We chose an agent-based approach to 
extend the metaphor of a data-ecosystem allowing us to explicitly study generations  of  simulated  data  use  and  recombination,  and  understand  how 
changes in the underlying licensing practices impact the health of the ecosys-
tem. 

 
The aim of these tasks is to develop a reusable and extendable formalization that answers the stated questions of this research to provide ongoing value in understanding 
the  impacts  licensing  has  on  data  reuse.  Additionally  by  developing  a  machinereadable representation of licensing, this allows us to both capture the observed practices  within  real  communities,  and  also  affords  us  the  ability  to  generate  synthetic 
collections  characterizing  various  licensing  strategies.  By  removing  the  dependency 
to gather real data on licensing practices we are able to develop and test our model in 
parallel to solving the additional challenge of gathering sample data. 

R. Hosking and M. Gahegan 

Evaluation 

In addition to successfully demonstrating the value of each step of our approach, we 
conduct an evaluation of this research, broken into two components: Firstly a review 
of the ontological reasoning we have developed, and secondly an analysis of the simulations we run. The areas on which we focus for our review of the developed reasoning are: 

  Coverage of licensing terms 
  Extensibility of our representation to incorporate additional licensing terms 
  The level of expressivity and the reasoning facilitated. 

 
By using synthetic data sets of caricatured strategies as well as harvesting sample data 
from the web we will evaluate our measures of data collection health along with our 
model that generates them. We use the following set of criteria: 

  Explanatory adequacy  Does it help make sense of the observed data 
 

Interpretability  Are the component of the model understandable and linked 
to known processes 

  Descriptive adequacy  Does the model fit the observed data 
  Principal of Simplicity  is the model overly complex for the task 
  Generalizability  is the model a good predictor of future observations 

 
Descriptive accuracy will be particularly difficult to measure for two reasons. Firstly, 
the predicted effects on the reuse of data are only one element of a much larger ecosystem  thus  any  correlation  to  observed  data  must  take  into  account  a  diversity  of 
additional processes. Secondly, the impacts of licensing are largely felt privately and 
dispersed globally; without richer publication of both data provenance and data citations it is very difficult to gather evidence.  

Reflections 

Relative to existing attempts to capture rights, or ontologies to represent Copyright we 
aim  to  make  misalignment,  uncertainty  and  ambiguity  first  class  citizens,  due  to  their 
implications  on  research  practice.  We  build  on  existing  knowledge  that  discusses  the 
effects of licensing, and expand on the current means and medium of sharing and applying this knowledge. We place importance on the role of governance in making progress 
in this area, thus this work is strongly guided by fostering effective governance strategies 
for data. We aim to constructively contribute to the discussion of utilizing semantic tools 
to measure and improve our understanding of such an important aspect of contemporary 
science. We aim to not replace the role of legal advice, nor directly guide the application 
of licensing; as we do not venture into the larger social and economic norms that form an 
essential  component  of  these choices. What  we  aim  is  to  facilitate the  discussion, and 
ensure that we are all asking the right questions. 

 
?

?

?
The Effects of Licensing on Open Data 

1.  Creative Commons: About The Licenses, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
2.  Free Software Foundation, I.: GNU General Public License, 

http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html 

3.  Korn, N., Oppenheim, C., Duncan, C.: IPR and Licensing issues in Derived Data. Report 

Submitted to the JISC, 112 (2007) 

4.  Gobal Land Cover Network, http://www.glcn.org/index_en.jsp 
5.  Global  Observation  for  Forest  Cover  and  Land  Dynamics,  http://www.fao.org/gtos/gofc-

gold/ 

6.  Wilbanks,  J.:  Public  domain,  copyright  licenses  and  the  freedom  to  integrate  science. 

JCOM 7 (2008) 

7.  Wilbanks, J.T., Wilbanks, T.J.: Science, Open Communication and Sustainable Develop-

ment. Sustainability 2, 9931015 (2010) 

8.  Hey, T., Tansley, S., Tolle, K.: The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery. 

Microsoft, Redmond (2009) 

9.  Stallman, R.M.: Free Software, Free Society 
10.  Commons, C.: CC Zero, http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/ 

zero/1.0/legalcode 

11.  Open  Knowledge  Foundation:  Open  Data  Commons  Public  Domain  Dedication  and  Li-

cense (PDDL), http://opendatacommons.org/licenses/pddl/ 

12.  Paper, A.W.: The MPEG-21 Rights Expression Language, pp. 116 (2003) 
13.  W3C: ODRL Community Group, http://www.w3.org/community/odrl/ 
14.  Coyle, K.: Rights Expression Languages A Report for the Library of Congress, pp. 153 

(2004) 

15.  Garcia, R.: A semantic web approach to digital rights management. Doctorate in computer 
science and digital communication. Department of Technologies. Universitat Pompeu Fa-
bra, Barcelona (2006) 

16.  Digital Property Rights Language, http://xml.coverpages.org/dprl.html 
17.  Lisp Programming Language, 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisp_programming_language 

18.  W3C: Extensible Markup Language (XML), http://www.w3.org/XML/ 
19.  W3C: XML Schema, http://www.w3.org/XML/Schem 
20.  Abelson,  H.,  Adida,  B.,  Linksvayer,  M.,  Yergler,  N.:  ccREL:  The  Creative  Commons 

Rights Expression Language, pp. 132 (2008) 

21.  W3C: Resource Description Framework (RDF), http://www.w3c.org/RDF/ 
22.  Barlas,  C.:  Digital  Rights  Expression  Languages  (DRELs).  JISC  Technology  and  Stan-

dards Watch (2006) 

23.  Act, P.: Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary  and Artistic Works Berne Con-

vention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, pp. 129 (1979) 

24.  Semantic Copyright Project, http://semanticcopyright.org/index.php/ontology 
25.  Shvaiko, P., Euzenat, J.: Ontology matching: state of the art and future chal-lenges. IEEE 

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 25, 158176 (2012) 

 
 

 
