Route Planning Using Linked Open Data

Pieter Colpaert

Ghent University - iMinds

Department of Electronics and Information Systems, Multimedia Lab

Gaston Crommenlaan 8, Bus 201
9050 Ledeberg-Ghent, Belgium

pieter.colpaert@ugent.be

Abstract. Intermodal route planners need to be provided with a lot of data from
various sources: geographical data, speed limits, road blocks, time schedules, realtime vehicle locations, etc. These datasets need to be interoperable world-wide.
Today, a lot of data integration needs to be done before this data can be be reused.
Route planning becomes a data problem rather than a mathematical problem. Can
the Web act as a global distributed dataspace for transport data? Could introducing Linked Open Data to this field make the data quality raise?

Keywords: #eswcphd2014Colpaert, Linked Open Data, Semantic Web,
intermodal route planning.

1 Introduction

Intermodal route planning is a term used for planners which can advise the end-user
to use multiple modes to get from one point to another. A transport mode is a type of
transport, for example a train, tram, bus, car or bicycle. The amount of data that can be
used to extract information from, is infinite. For instance, trying to answer the question
how long do I have to walk from one point to another? can take into account the
geolocation of the streets, the weather conditions at that time of the day, the steepness
of the road, whether or not there is a sidewalk, criminality reports to check whether it is
safe to walk through these streets, the accessibility of the road for e.g., wheelchairs or
blind people, whether the street is blocked by works at that time, etc. We can imagine
the complexities that arise if the user does not only want to walk, but that he also wants
to get advice taking different transport modes into account. Advising an end-user can
use an infinite amount of data that remains relevant for the problem. An open world
approach is needed: a certain pool of data should be queried with the assumption that
there is more data outside of this pool that may be relevant to the question.

Data quality, as defined by Orr et al. [14], is the measure of the agreement between
the data views presented by an information system and that same data in the real world.
When there is no agreement at all, the data quality is 0%, if it complies completely, it
equals 100%. Orr et al. described in 1998 how the Feedback-Control System (FCS) (cfr.
Fig. 1) affects data quality. This system describes a data life cycle: data is made available
for reuse (A), the reuse is stimulated and supported (B), means to provide feedback are
in place (C) and the feedback is also processed (D). The data quality increases at the
speed of the slowest link in this process.

V. Presutti et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2014, LNCS 8465, pp. 827833, 2014.
c Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

P. Colpaert
?

?

?
(cid:918)
(cid:918)
?

?

?
(cid:918)
?

?

?
Fig. 1. The Feedback-Control System applied to data.

The trend towards Open Data is stimulating the reuse of the data. Can Linked Open

Data indeed be used to raise the quality of transport data?

2 State of the Art

In The Netherlands in 1991, the mathematical problem of intermodal route planning
has already been solved for data dumps of the Dutch railway system [16]. After that,
quite a few projects came to exist, implementing intermodal route planning in their own
way. The first section gives a concise overview of the state of the art of intermodal route
planning systems. After discussing a couple of intermodal route planners and two algorithms for searching time tables, the state of the art of Linked Open Data is discussed.
Finally, a couple of todays vocabularies used to publish or exchange transport data are
discussed.

2.1 Intermodal Route Planners

Current intermodal route planners such as Open Trip Planner, Rapid Round based Routing [5] or Navitia.io use a closed world approach: they make the assumption that the
data on the machine is complete and represents the real world perfectly. Both Open
Trip Planner and Navitia.io provide a Web service to get answers to the question which
routes should be followed to go from one point to another Rapid Round based Routing
[5] is a C++-library which is memory efficient and has been used both from clientside
as from serverside. The investment needed to add new datasets (both a new mode of
transport or a new region) are high as manual intervention is needed to load the datasets
in the store.
?

?

?
2.2 Route Planning Algorithms

For all kinds of route planning problems, Dijkstra is a popular solution. It can solve
shortest path problems in a graph in O(E + V log V ) with E the number of edges and
V the number of vertices. It can easily be optimized by using heuristics (such as with
the A* search algorithm) or the graph can be pruned while running the algorithm.

Route planning systems for public transit mostly use the RAPTOR algorithm [7]. All
three route planners mentioned above are three different implementations of this algo-
rithm. It is written to exploit the inherent structure of transport networks by operating
in rounds and processing each route1 of the network instead of popular graph based
solutions based on Dijkstra.

A more recent approach is called the Connection Scan Algorithm (CSA) [8]. Just like
RAPTOR, it is not graph-based. It is however not centered around routes, but around
connections2, which might be interesting as less data needs to be fetched per request.
CSA is a very recent algorithm where parallel extensions, just like RAPTOR, seem
promising [8].

2.3 Linked Open Data

Globally, data owners are slowly taking the decision to publish their data as Open Data.
One way to go forward with Open Data is Linked Open Data (LOD), which uses RDF
to structure the data and which uses the Web as a distributed dataspace. The global
dataspace that comes to exist is called the LOD cloud.

There are tools available to raise the awareness of data owners. For example, The
5 stars of Linked Open Data3 summarize the focus points of publishing Linked Open
Data to the Web.

There are various steps to publishing Linked Open Data: data needs to be made dis-
coverable, a suiting license need to be agreed upon, obstacles (such as privacy issues
or copyright holder discussions) need to be overcome, etc. Various projects have introduced Linked Data Life Cycles [15,19,3,10]. These cycles describe the process to
create and maintain Linked Open Data. More recently, also best practices to publish
linked data on the web have been published by the W3C4.

When the data is published, data is not per se discoverable. Data about the data
(meta-data) needs to be published alongside the data. To make data discoverable for
humans as an organisation, there is data portal software available, such as CKAN. To
make data discoverable for machines, ontologies such as VoID [2] and DCAT [11] are
available. There are various public Open Data Portals where datasets can be added, such
as http://datahub.io.

While the Linked Open Data technology is available, there is however no maintained
Linked Open Transport Data to be found that is published by transport agencies, at the
time of writing.

1 A route is a list of stop points a certain vehicle follows (e.g., a bus line).
2 A connection in this context is a link to a next stop point.
3 http://5stardata.info
4 http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/NOTE-ld-bp-20140109/

P. Colpaert

2.4 Vocabularies

The General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS) for public transit5 has been developed
by Brian Ferris at Google for Google Maps. At the moment of writing, GTFS is the
de facto standard for data dumps on public transit. In 2011, Ian Davis transformed this
specification to an ontology, which is defined at http://vocab.org/transit/terms/.

Other specifications in the Open Transport field are for instance the Transmodel
specification for public transport [4], SIRI for real-time public transit data exchange,
Open511 for traffic events or DATEX for exchange of road transport data.

In 2009, the UK transformed 3 transport datasets towards RDF using the National
Public Transport Access Network (NaPTAN) vocabulary. It is greatly inspired by Trans-
model. NaPTAN defines the geographical hierarchy of the UK, defines the difference
between a stop point (a place where a vehicle stops) and a stop area (a collection of
stop points). It also defines different types of identification mechanisms for these stop
areas and stop points and defines different types of stop points in the UK. The resulted
dataset can still be queried at http://transport.data.gov.uk/.

3 Problem Statement and Contribution

Intermodal route planning is a data problem rather than a mathematical problem. Different datasets need to share the same identifiers (or make sure their identifiers are
interoperable), need to be able to be queried nearly in real-time, need to be able to process machine readable feedback (as no dataset represents reality 100% correctly), need
to track provenance, need to be made discoverable for both humans and machines, etc.
These needs can all be put at a letter in Fig. 1:

 A: publishing data
 B: reusing data
 C: providing feedback
 D: processing feedback

The main contribution of this thesis is bringing together the field of intermodal route
planning and Linked Open Data. The added value for data publishers researched is
raising data quality. When Linked Open Data is introduced to intermodal route planning,
algorithms need to be adapted to work with this technology.

4 Methodology

In order to achieve the best possible results within the available resources and time-
frame, we suggest the following projects to be built: a high-level Open Transport vocabulary and an Open Transport Data Portal to make transport data discoverable and to
stimulate a discussion on used vocabularies, tool chain, data reuse, etc. A third project
will work together with the community at the Open Transport Data Portal to build a

5 This thesis focuses on Open Transport, which also takes into account traffic, road signs, park-

ing lots, taxis, bicycle routes, etc.
?

?

?
referential database for stop identifiers. A fourth project are various implementation of
data publishing mechanisms (such as SPARQL). A last project is a proof of concept
in which the Web will be used as a global distributed database for an intermodal route
planning algorithm.

Future development on vocabulary will be carried out by the Open Transport community of the Open Knowledge Foundation. The methodology used for creating this vocabulary is inspired on Process and methodology for developing semantic agreements
by the JoinUp project [1].

5 Preliminary Results

5.1 Algorithms

Dijkstra and its optimizations are to be avoided in most cases as it is hard to parallelize
[7,12,13], yet it can be considered for subproblems.

For public transport, RAPTOR and CSA seem promising. Both algorithms can be
considered, depending on what data each service is going to provide. For RAPTOR,
starting at a certain stop, all routes are needed which leave next at that stop. For CSA,
starting at a certain stop, only the next stop is needed for all next departures in that stop.
Both algorithms are very promising for parallelization. Further research will show what
algorithm is best in this use case.

5.2 Open Data

The 5 stars of Open Data Portals A paper has been written for the MeTTeG2013 conference [6], a conference for e-government, which summarizes five focus points for an
Open Data Portal. The paper was written in a interdisciplinary setting with the communications department of Ghent University.

Open Transport. At the Open Knowledge Foundation (OKF), I have started coordinating the Open Transport Working Group6. The focus of this working group are three
projects:
1. The Open Transport Vocabulary7 creates a minimal representation of all concepts

that are needed for intermodal route planning.

2. Stations.io8: a knowledge base to link identifiers for stop areas and stop points. The
project links various sources together by creating owl:sameAs links, links identifiers to their concepts: stop areas or stop points and creates links between the
different stop points and stop areas.

3. The Open Transport Data Portal9 makes data discoverable, will analyze the added
datasets for inconsistencies, will validate the datasets, will host conversations
around transport data reuse.

6 http://transport.okfn.org
7 http://github.com/opentransport/vocabulary
8 http://stations.io
9 http://transport.datahub.io

P. Colpaert

Towards Linked Open Data The DataTank [17] is a data adapter. It takes a data source,
such as a CSV file, JSON file, a web-service, a website, a database, etc. as an input
and transforms it into a RESTful interface. The DataTank also supports mapping these
sources towards RDF using a mapping language. The mapping language that will be
supported in the next Long Term Support release of The DataTank is an extension of
R2RML, called RML [9].

Using The DataTank we have create a RESTful interface to access transport data in

Belgium called iRail. This interface can be found at http://data.iRail.be/.

Distributed Version Control for triples. R&Wbase [18] has been presented at the
WWW2013 conference at the Linked Data On the Web (LDOW) workshop. It adds
a version to each triple in a triple store which supports named graphs.

6 Evaluation Plan

As the thesis is still in a very early stage, the evaluation plan is still very vague. Data
quality, defined as the agreement of the data with the real-world, needs to be assessed
before applying Linked Open Data technologies and after. In order to get results, the
FCS model will be used (see Fig. 1). Data quality will be derived from: the amount
of data reuse, the amount of data feedback, the amount of data feedback that is being
processed and the amount of data about a certain real-world object that is published.
When these four factors increase, the data quality will increase [14] and the thesis will
be validated.

While the data quality should increase, the intermodal route planning algorithms
should remain fully functional without regressions in response time. Different architectures will be set-up which reuse the linked datasets and feed the right data in the
algorithms.

7 Conclusion

This papers contribution is to bring together the field of intermodal route planning with
Linked Open Data. Linked Open Data tools are applied to data problems with intermodal route planning. Research focuses on raising the data quality. Four criteria need
to be assessed  data reuse, data feedback, processing data feedback and publishing
data . Further research as part of this thesis shows whether or not the Web can then be
used as a global distributed database for intermodal route planners.

Acknowledgements. This thesis is supervised by prof. Rik Van de Walle and cosupervised by dr. Erik Mannens and dr. Ruben Verborgh. The research activities described in this paper were funded by Ghent University, iMinds, the Flemish department
of Economics, Science and Innovation (EWI), the Institute for the Promotion of Innovation by Science and Technology in Flanders (IWT) and the European Union.
?

?

