 

Designing an Integrated Semantic Framework  

for Structured Opinion Summarization 

Ehsan Asgarian and Mohsen Kahani 

Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran 
ehsan.asgarian@stu-mail.um.ac.ir 

Abstract. Knowing about people's opinions and viewpoints plays an essential 
role  in  decision-making  processes  involving  regular  customers  to  executive 
managers.  Therefore,  in  the  past  decade,  with  the  advent  of  Web  2.0,  a  new 
orientation  of  natural  language  processing  science  called  opinion  mining  has 
been  emerged.  The  main  problem  of  exploring  feature-level  opinions  is  the 
complexity of feature extraction and its relations with the words containing the 
sentiment within unstructured texts, which reduces the accuracy of opinion min-
ing. The purpose of the structured opinion summarization is to demonstrate the 
mentioned features in the reviews and express the sentiment value of users for 
each  feature,  quantitatively.  The  main  idea  of  this  research  is  to  consider  the 
semantic (knowledge) to analyze the sentiment in the review by developing the 
opinion ontology. Therefore, a semantic framework as an integrated method is 
proposed in all stages of feature-based opinion summarization. 

Keywords: #eswcphd2014Asgarian, Semantic Framework, Opinion Ontology, 
Sentiment Analysis, feature based opinion summarization. 

Introduction 

One of the newest areas of research on natural language processing, information retrieval and text mining is opinion mining. In general, contextual information can be 
divided into two sets of facts (explicit information) and opinions (sentiments or implicit information). The primary aim of opinion mining is to extract, classify and summarize people's viewpoints and opinions on various features of an entity or a specific 
event  among  valid  resources.  Most  of  the  work  done  so  far  in  the  field  of  opinion 
mining has been on the market and commercial products from the viewpoints of costumers (to select and purchase goods) or distributors (to improve business, competition in the market, effective advertising placement, benchmarking and the recognition 
of  users'  tastes  and  interests).  Furthermore,  there  are  applications  in  medical  fields, 
social science, management and politics. Work on this research area is rapidly growing and new applications of opinion mining in different areas for optimal interactions 
and decision-making issues of managers or users can be defined. 

In  general,  a  sentiment  analysis  can  be  classified  into  three  levels  including  the 
document level (review), the sentence level (semantic phrases) and feature (aspect)-
based  level;  the  feature-based  level  has  been  recently  taken  into  consideration  by 

V. Presutti et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2014, LNCS 8465, pp. 885894, 2014. 
 Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014 

E. Asgarian and M. Kahani 

many  researchers.  Initial  studies  on  opinion  mining  frequently  attempted  to  classify 
the opinions or overall sentiments of a document into positive or negative feedbacks 
[1].  Afterwards,  researchers  tried  to  determine  the  satisfaction  or  dissatisfaction  degree of the document (instead of a two-state classification) [2]. Often supervised me-
thods, in which sample labels are manually marked, were used for these categories in 
commercial product fields where reviews are directly expressed. The main problem at 
this level is the assumption that the topic is the same for the entire gathered text or 
documents. However, different parts of a document (different reviews) may deal with 
various issues.  

Thus, it is vital to identify the topics of different sections and study them separately 
before  analyzing  the  sentiment.  Therefore,  opinion  mining  researchers  continuously 
conducted  their  work  on  analyzing  the  sentiment  at  sentence  level  [3]  or  semantic 
phrase  level  [4].  Subjectivity  analysis  is  generally  applied  to  distinguish  between 
subjective sentences and objective ones (e.g. facts such as news) at this level. In recent  years  most  conducted  researches  in  this  field  have  been  aimed  at  non-English 
languages [5-7]. The major problem of opinion mining at sentence level is due to the 
assumption that writer's opinion is the same in the entire document. In other words, 
there can be various opinions (more than one sentiment) on different features (topics) 
in a sentence. Moreover, in many cases entities (concepts) and their features are not 
well defined or separated by analyzing the sentiment at sentence level. 

Thus, a feature-based approach to opinion mining was proposed owing to existing 
problems  for  analyzing  the  sentiment  at  document  and  sentence  level  [8,  9].  In  this 
approach, entities (topics) and their expressed features are firstly extracted from the 
text and then the expressed opinions are analyzed for each feature. For example, consider this sentence "Nokia has a good call quality but it is rather expensive!"; Remarks 
about Nokia cell phone entity (the target) and the call quality and price features are 
positive and negative respectively.  

Compared  to  simple  text  summarizers,  structured  summarization  of  opinions  has 
been formed according to feature based sentiment analysis, in which useful and relevant information will be available to users. In other words, the purpose of the structured opinion summarization is to demonstrate the mentioned features in the reviews 
and  express  the  sentiment  value  of  users  for  each  feature  quantitatively.  The  main 
problem of exploring feature-level opinions is the complexities of feature extraction 
and their relations with the words containing the sentiment within unstructured texts, 
which  reduces  the  accuracy  of  the  opinion  mining.  The  following  figure  shows  an 
example of a summary generator based on opinion features. 

In  this  research,  a  semantic  framework  is  designed  for  structured  summarization 
(based  on  features)  of  opinions.  In  the  main  phase  of  the  proposed  framework,  we 
develop  the  opinion  ontology  for  reviews  by  receiving  opinions  within  various  domains with different languages and, therefore, it can be used for the bulk of reviews. 
In  other  words,  we  can  extract  features  of  the  text,  analyze  the  sentiment,  integrate 
and summarize opinions by the developed ontology. Using the framework of the proposed ontology, the output results of the structured summarization will be presented 
as semantic data (e.g. RDF). 

 
?

?

?
State of the Art 

In  general,  a  feature-based  opinions  summarization  comprises  three  main  steps,  extracting the features, sentiment analysis and the integration or summarization of them.  
In  the  information  retrieval  area,  many  methods  for  extracting  concepts  and  relations between them within the documents have been proposed. However, the purpose 
of these methods is to identify the main subject of the document and detect the words 
describing this subject. The relations between subjects are also identified based on their 
common words and by using various methods of determining the string similarity. 

Different methods used to extract features in the review can be divided into five cat-
egories: 1) frequent nouns and noun phrases 2) based on relations between the feature 
and the opinion 3) supervised learning methods 4) topic modeling techniques and 5) 
hybrid  methods.  Most  initial  researches  into  extracting  features  from  the  document 
were based on nouns and relations between a feature and a sentiment expressions. 

The second phase of opinions summarization aims to detect and rank the sentiment 
regarding each of detected features. Thus, two different approaches are employed: 1) 
supervised learning approaches 2) Sentiment-lexicon-based approaches. 

After extracting the features and determining the sentiment of reviews, obtained results  of  two  previous  steps  are  combined  so  as  to  produce  a  summary  of  opinions 
about  various  features.  Hence,  similar  features  in  synonymous  groups  should  be 
merged together and their correspondent sentiments should be averaged. Finally, results in a structured way (quantifying the sentiment for each feature) or selection of 
positive and negative sentences about each feature in order of preference (time, intensity and ...) are displayed. 

Semantic  approaches  have  been  recently  favored  by  the  researchers  of  the  field. 
This paper focuses on opinion mining methods, exclusively. A new area of semantic 
techniques  for  opinion  mining  with  the  aim  of  extracting  the  features  of  the  main  
 

Fig. 1. Class and Properties Diagram for the Marl Ontology v1.0 

E. Asgarian and M. Kahani 

entity  in  a  hierarchical  structure  and  determining  the  sentiment  expressed  for  each 
feature has been recently created. However, most of these methods apply the ontology 
of a particular commercial product which has been manually developed by an expert 
so as to use the semantic in opinion mining. Generally, none of the previous studies 
has been worked on converting the reviews into semantic data.  

The most significant part of semantic based opinion mining is to create the ontology  for a group of opinions. The opinion ontology  should extract features, sentiment 
expressions and the relations between them by receiving the basic and limited knowledge from an expert (the primary list of the sentiment words and the structural taxonomy of features within a desired domain) and applying an automatic method. 

2.1 

First Phase: Ontology Schema Design 

To  develop  the  opinion  ontology,  the  first  step  is  to  design  a  conceptual  model  or 
ontology schema of opinions. In fact, ontology schema gives us a logical structure to 
keep the main entity (main subject) along with its aspects and relevant features.  

In [10], a comprehensive model for keeping opinions was proposed as a quintuple 
(oj, fjk, soijkl, hi, tl). Where oj is an object or a main entity (a target object), fjk is a feature of the object, soijkl is the sentiment value, hi is the opinion holder and tl is the time 
at which the opinion is given. This definition provides a framework to transform unstructured text to structured data. The quintuple above is basically a database schema, 
based on which the extracted opinions can be put into a database table [11]. Accor-
dingly, semantic data formats have been proposed to keep opinions and the sentiment 
value  of  them  [12].  Figure  1 shows  Marl  ontology  schema  v1.0.  However,  it  is  not 
possible to express comparative opinions or conditional statements  in  these  models. 
Moreover, features such as date and time (in Marl ontology), trust and data integrity 
have not been taken into consideration. 

In  Opinion-ML,  a  new  structure  based  on  XML  Schema  has  been  recently  proposed  according  to  the  developed  Emotion-ML  model  [13].  The  main  problems  of 
this method are lack of possibility for expressing constraint of parameters, capability 
to express relationships between opinions and support for comparative opinions. 

2.2  The Second Phase: Development of Opinion Ontology 

Studies have been recently conducted into the usage of domain ontology or product 
ontology in opinion mining [14, 15]. However in all of them, it is assumed that this 
ontology  is  manually  given  to  the  system  by  an  expert.  In  [16],  a  semi-automated 
method for developing the ontology of opinions called FDSOT for a specific product 
has  been  presented.  Nevertheless,  in  fact,  the  FDSOT  ontology  is  a  bipartite  graph 
which is simply composed of features and opinions on each one. In order to construct 
fuzzy domain ontology tree, features are initially identified and the hierarchy of features  based  on  the  lexical  similarity  and  the  user's  knowledge  are  determined  after-
wards.  However,  this  ontology  depends  on  the  domain,  without  logical  schema  and 
entirely useless for more complicated domains.  

 
?

?

?
In  a  similar  methodology  in  FCA  (Formal  Concept  Analysis)  system  [17],  some 
messages are reviewed by the expert and a feature/sentiment expression cross-table is 
executed manually. Then the ontology of word relations is semi-automatically developed by the OntoGen tool. It has some problems as follows: not using the ontology 
schema, limited to brief reviews on a specific domain,  not considering the relations 
between  sentiment  expressions  and  limited  to  extracting  one  type  of  relation  (Sub-
Concept-Of). 

2.3  Third Phase: Converting Reviews to the Semantic Format  

Using the Opinion Ontology 

Various methods for using the pre-built ontology of products to extract features and 
their sentiment expressions have been proposed [14, 15]. However, most knowledgebased opinion mining methods use the ontology of opinions created by an expert in 
very  few  domains.  Then  they  attempt  to  expand  the  input  ontology  and  adapt  the 
words within the ontology to the reviews in order to extract features and their sentiment expressions. Moreover, there is no framework of the ontology for mapping the 
concepts of the opinions and relation between them which is another problem of the 
current methods. Figure 2 shows an example of the ontology of digital camera for use 
in opinion mining. 

Moreover, a framework for detecting a sentiment  was presented using the predefined ontology of products by an expert in [18]. In Kontopoulos's article [17], a method for extracting features of various entities in twitter messages has been presented 
in terms of ontology,  which is used to determine the interest or trends according to 
features of various products and rank them. 

Fig. 2. Product ontology used in [15] which was created manually 

Problem Statement and Contributions 

The  current  feature-based  opinion  mining  methods  purely  use  statistical  methods, 
machine learning technologies or syntactic relations of components for a sentence to 

E. Asgarian and M. Kahani 

automatically extract features and the sentiment expressions. Hence, they have many 
weaknesses  in  dealing  with  linguistic  and  conceptual  complexities  to  identify  the 
sentiment of opinions. Thus, considering the existing complexities of identifying the 
entity  (the  main  subject),  extracting  the  features  and  detecting  the  sentiment  
associated  with  each  feature,  it  is  vital  to  employ  semantic  methods.  Employing  a 
knowledge-based  opinion  mining  method  helps  to  determine  various  features,  the 
relationship between them and the main entity as well as the expressed sentiment for 
each feature in complex domains.  

Thus, in this research, a semantic framework is proposed to be applied in an integrated method in all stages of opinion summarization. The purpose of this semantic 
framework  is  to  convert  the  bulk  of  opinions  into  the  RDF  format  (semantic  structured information) using the opinion ontology at the reasonable time and applicable to 
various  languages  and  domains.  However,  we  need  to  have  the  full  knowledge  of 
various semantic domains so as to develop a general opinion ontology, which is virtually unattainable. Thus, a semi-automatic method is presented to create the opinion 
ontology  in  a  specific  semantic  domain.  Hence,  a  conceptual  model  or  ontology 
schema of opinions is designed to keep opinions in a structured form. Next, given the 
complexities  of  natural  language  to  express  the  sentiment,  the  target  language  is 
determined  and  the  opinion  ontology  is  formed  using  the  opinion  documents  on  a 
specific  domain.  Then  we  can  use  it  to  extract  features  of  opinions  and  detect 
sentiment expressions for each feature. 

Considering the fact that there are a lot of different features, applying this ontology 
rather  than  non-semantic  approaches  results  in  accuracy  improvement  and  time 
complexity  reduction  to  extract  features  and  recognize  general  or  feature-specific 
sentiment  expressions  in  reviews.  As  a  further  matter,  it  is  possible  to  calculate 
semantic similarities of different features of an entity by the help of various perfectly 
defined  relations  in  the  ontology.  As  a  result,  synonymous  features  are  categorized 
and  their  correspondent  sentiment  quantities  are  combined  together.  Sentiment 
quantity  is  calculated  using  quantification  of  sentiment  expressions  describing 
features  in  reviews.  Moreover,  taxonomic  relations  defined  in  the  ontology  help  us 
determine sentiment quantity used in general and specific features, more accurately. 

Proposed Approach 

As  mentioned  earlier,  the  main  objective  of  our  research  is  to  propose  a  semantic 
framework  for  using  it  in  the  all  steps  of  feature-based  opinion  summarization.  For 
this end, the opinion ontology is made using a semi-automated method and applying it 
on  domain  specific  reviews  corpus  to  analyze  the  sentiment  in  the  new  reviews. 
Therefore, a semantic framework as an integrated method is proposed in all stages of 
feature-based opinion summarization . 

The aim of the proposed framework is to convert the bulk of unstructured reviews 
into  the  structured  semantic  data  format  in  the  scalable  time  as  well  as  being 
applicable  to  various  languages  and  domains.  Therefore,  due  to  the  complexities  of 
the  feature-based  opinion  summarization,  in  this  research,  semantic  methods  are 
employed to identify the entity (main subject), extract features, detect the sentiment 
associated  with  each  feature  and  finally  show  the  relationships  and  visualize  the 

 
?

?

?
results.  Using  a  knowledge-based  approach  helps  to  determine  various  features,  the 
relation between them and the main entity as well as the expressed sentiment for each 
feature in complex domains.  

Before developing the opinion ontology, a conceptual model (ontology schema) of 
opinions independent of the language and the domain is proposed to keep them in the 
structured  format.  Next,  given  the  complexities  of  natural  language  to  express  the 
sentiment,  we  select  the  target  language  and  the  opinion  ontology  is  formed    using  
the basic knowledge of the user and the domain-specific corpus of reviews. The most 
significant part of this research is to present an (semi)automatic method for creating 
the  opinion  ontology.  The  quality  of  obtained  ontology  plays  an  important  role  in 
accuracy  of  the  proposed  structured  opinion  summarization.  The  creation  of  the 
ontology  is  completed  through  three  steps  in  an  iterative  and  incremental  process:  
1)  Extraction  of  features  2)  Sentiment  expressions  detection  3)  Grouping  the 
synonymous features and the determination of the relations between features and the 
sentiment expressions, with an expert's feedback in an iterative process. By repeating 
these steps, we can make use of the obtained features and the sentiment expressions 
from previous iteration, for extracting new ones in the next process. In the meanwhile, 
the usage of an expert's knowledge (feedback) for the verification of obtained features 
and the sentiment expressions in each repeat prevents error propagation and improves 
accuracy.  In  order  to  extract  the  features,  an  iterative  approach  is  suggested  to 
combine the existing methods and their improved versions.  

Fig. 3. Proposed semantic framework for the structured opinion mining 

Then the ontology of opinions developed in the previous step will be used to detect 
the  features  and  various  opinions  on  the  desired  domain.  Using  the  ontology  of 
opinions, detected features with their sentimental expressions are classified and will 
be expressed in the form of semantic data (e.g. RDF format). Finally, analysis of the 

E. Asgarian and M. Kahani 

semantic  data  required  to  identify  the  sentiment  of  the  conflicting  opinions  and 
essential  inferences  from  comparative  ones  is  conducted.  Figure  3  shows  proposed 
semantic framework for the structured opinion mining. 

Evaluation Strategy 

The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  present  a  semantic  framework  for  the  feature-based 
opinion mining. To assess the accuracy of the proposed method for opinion mining, a 
labeled test set should be used. However, feature labels and the sentiment values of 
opinions in an actual data set are not determined and these labels must be prepared by 
an expert In some commercial data sets the overall rating given to a product by the 
opinion holder (1 to 5 stars) is used as the sentiment (satisfaction) value of the whole 
document. In similar methodologies, two methods for measuring the accuracy of the 
extracted  features  and  estimating  error  rate  of  the  sentiment  of  each  feature  are 
employed to assess the feature-based opinion mining methods. In order to determine 
the  accuracy  of  extracted  features,  a  mapping  between  groups  of  real  features  and 
detected  ones  based  on  similarity  of  words  of  each  feature  set  (synonyms)  is 
established.  Then  metrics  including  the  precision,  recall  and  F1-measure  are  used. 
Moreover, in order to calculate the accuracy of the predicted sentiment value for each 
feature, the mean absolute error (MAE) or the mean square error (MSE) measures are 
used.  In  some  papers  [19,  20],  the  ranking  loss  measure  is  used  to  calculate  the 
accuracy  of  the  sentiment  of  each  feature  of  various  products.  This  measure 
demonstrates  the  average  distance  between  the  predicted  sentiment  and  the  main 
sentiment  value  (assigned  by  an  expert)  for  each  feature  which  is  equivalent  to  the 
mean absolute error. 

Given that there is no structured semantic opinion summarization system, features 
and  challenges  of  comparing  systems  in  different  stages  and  phases  have  been 
summarized in the following table: 

Table 1. Comparing systems in various stages of structured opinion summarization 

Phase 

(Phase I) Ontology schema 

design 

(Phase II) Creating  the 

opinion ontology 

(Phase III) 

Methodology 

Opinion Model[10] 
Marl Ontology[12] 
Opinion-ML[13] 

FCA[17] 

FDSOT[16] 

OSPM[18] 

Domain 

Domain-independent 
Domain-independent 
Domain-independent 

A cell phone on 

twitter 

Laptop (in Chinese) 

IMDB movies 

Ontology-based approach 

Somprasertsris Method[15] 

Cameras 

for opinion mining 

Mart Inezs Method[14] 

IMDB movies 

 
?

?

?
Expected Results 

An  important  outcome  of  this  research  is  to  provide  a  semantic  framework  for 
employing  the  semantic  methods  integrated  in  all  stages  of  opinion  summarization. 
Therefore,  using  the  semantic  framework,  it  is  possible  to  transform  the  bulk  of 
opinion  documents  into  structured  semantic  data  at  reasonable  time.  Moreover, 
methods  for  conducting  an  analysis  of  the  comparative  and  conditional  opinions, 
drawing  inference  about  them  and  combining  the  conflicting  opinions  (expressions 
containing the opposite sentiment) will be presented. 

Another  advantage  of  using  opinion  ontology  is  to  develop  relations  between 
concepts and features of opinions and the concepts of other ontology and linked data 
on  the  Web.  Furthermore,  we  can  use  visual  tools  of  the  current  ontology  such  as 
protege  [21],  OntoGen  [22]  and  RDF  Gravity  [23]  to  express  and  demonstrate  the 
structured summary of opinions. Thus, in order to convert the opinion documents into 
semantic data, we can present various categories based on the sentiment (such as the 
positive  and  negative  points  of  the  entity)  or  feature  (monitoring  the  opinions  on  a 
specific feature) to the user. It is also possible to search and draw better inferences on 
semantic data in opinions. The ontology schema has to be designed independently of 
the  domain  and  language,  so  that  it  can  be  used  within  the  various  domains  of 
reviews. 
