These Are Your Rights

A Natural Language Processing Approach to Automated

RDF Licenses Generation

Elena Cabrio1,2, Alessio Palmero Aprosio3, and Serena Villata1

1 INRIA Sophia Antipolis, France
{firstname.lastname}@inria.fr

2 EURECOM, France

3 Machine Linking Srl, Italy
alessio@machinelinking.com

Abstract. In the latest years, the Web has seen an increasing interest in
legal issues, concerning the use and re-use of online published material.
In particular, several open issues affect the terms and conditions under
which the data published on the Web is released to the users, and the
users rights over such data. Though the number of licensed material on
the Web is considerably increasing, the problem of generating machine
readable licenses information is still unsolved. In this paper, we propose
to adopt Natural Language Processing techniques to extract in an automated way the rights and conditions granted by a license, and we return
the license in a machine readable format using RDF and adopting two
well known vocabularies to model licenses. Experiments over a set of
widely adopted licenses show the feasibility of the proposed approach.

Keywords: #eswc2014Cabrio, RDF-based licenses
Natural Language Processing.

specifications,

Introduction

The material published on the Web is usually associated to its terms of use and
re-use, which provide the legal permissions and requirements the user has to
comply with when dealing with such material. In the Web of Data, the majority
of the published datasets are associated to specific licenses: as it has been shown
in [9,17], about 75% of all Linked Data datasets listed in the CKAN archive1
(Comprehensive Knowledge Archive Network) is associated to a license. Specifying the terms of re-use of the data is particularly important to foster the
use and re-use of the data itself, as underlined in [11]. However, apart from the
problem of specifying the license under which a certain dataset is released, other
problems arise in the actual licenses and copyright specification in the Web of
Data scenario, and in the Web in general. In particular, despite the Linked Data
principles [2], only few datasets are associated to the machine readable version
of the adopted license. As discussed by Rodriguez-Doncel et al. [17], specific

http://datahub.io/

V. Presutti et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2014, LNCS 8465, pp. 255269, 2014.
c Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

E. Cabrio, A. Palmero Aprosio, and S. Villata

licensing terms are still referenced in natural language (NL) text, and there is
the need to provide tools for supporting users in producing rights expressions in
a machine readable format, such that more datasets could be easily associated
to licenses. The lack of machine readable licenses specifications affects also the
development and adoption of frameworks dealing with the licensing terms in
an automated way, like for instance the licenses compatibility and composition
framework proposed by Governatori et al. [9].

In this paper, we answer the following research question:

 How to support the creation of machine readable licensing information, start-

ing from the natural language specification of the licenses?

The first point to be addressed consists in deciding the language to adopt to
specify the licenses in a machine readable format. We choose to rely on the RDF
language2, since it is a standard model for data interchange on the Web. More-
over, it is the language adopted by the Creative Commons Rights Expression
Language (CC REL)3, that explains how license information may be described
in a machine readable format using RDF. We aim at supporting both human
users and automated systems to generate, starting from the natural language
specification of the licenses, their RDF counterpart. Our scenario is as follows.
On the one side, we have a human user publishing a dataset on the Web of
Data; she wants to release its dataset for instance under the Open Government
License4 and, to be compliant with the Linked Data principles [2], she wants to
specify in RDF such license. This means she has to know the possible vocabularies able to express licensing terms, and she has to go through the license text
translating natural language terms into RDF. On the other side, an automated
tool, like those presented in [19,9], retrieves a number of datasets on the Web
of Data, and it needs the licensing information about such data. The problem
is that each dataset only provides, e.g., in its VoID description5, only the link
to the natural language text of the license. In order to retrieve processable licensing information, it has to crawl the natural language text and automatically
build its RDF description. Therefore, our research question breaks down into the
following sub-questions: i) Which vocabularies have to be adopted to express licenses in RDF?, and ii) How to develop an automated framework to support
the generation of RDF licenses specifications from their natural language texts?
First, we analyze existing vocabularies to represent licensing information, and
we choose two of them, namely the Creative Commons Rights Expression Language Ontology6, and the Open Digital Rights Language (ODRL) Ontology7. In
particular, we adopt the former to represent in RDF Creative Commons (CC)
licenses, and the latter to model all other licenses, given its broader scope. Our

http://www.w3.org/2011/rdf-wg/wiki/Main_Page
http://wiki.creativecommons.org/CC_REL
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
http://www.w3.org/TR/void/
http://creativecommons.org/ns
http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/
?

?

?
RDF-based representation of licenses represents the specific rights (i.e., permis-
sions, prohibitions and duties) granted by the licenses in the NL text.

Second, we adopt Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to develop
an automated online framework called NLL2RDF (Natural Language License to
RDF ) able to translate natural language licenses specifications into their RDF
definition using either the ODRL or the CC REL vocabulary. More precisely,
NLL2RDF relies on machine learning techniques: the task is treated as a classification problem in supervised learning, and the adopted learning algorithm is
Support Vector Machines (SVM) [4]. The algorithm is then trained over a set of
manually annotated licenses.

The proposed approach is a first attempt to provide an automated framework
able to output the RDF representation of the natural language description of a
license. NLL2RDF is intended to support the diffusion of RDF-based licensing
information attached to the datasets published on the Web of Data. Moreover,
our approach is not limited to the Web of Data scenario, but it can be used to
provide machine readable representation of licensing information not only for
datasets but also for documents or software products, e.g., the Apache License8.
Note that, given the complexity of the task, the current version of NLL2RDF
provides an RDF representation of licenses considering their basic deontic components only, i.e., we model permissions, prohibitions, and duties only, and we
do not consider at the present stage further constraints expressed by the licenses,
e.g., about time, payment information, and sub-licensing. The automated treatment of such information is left as future work.

The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the vocabularies,
and details the architecture of the proposed RDF licenses generation framework.
Section 3 presents the experimental setting, and the evaluation of NLL2RDF.
Section 4 compares the proposed approach with the related work in the literature.

2 Licenses: From Terms and Conditions to Triples

In this section, we first motivate our choice of the ODRL and CC REL vocab-
ularies, and we then describe the classes and properties we adopt from such
vocabularies (Section 2.1). Finally, we present the proposed framework to translate NL licenses into their RDF representation (Section 2.2).

2.1 CC REL and ODRL Vocabularies

Several vocabularies have been proposed in the last years to model licensing in-
formation. In particular, the following interconnected vocabularies provide high
level descriptions of licenses, with a particular attention to the Web of Data sce-
nario: LiMO9, L4LOD10, and ODRS11. More complex licenses information can

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
http://data.opendataday.it/LiMo
http://ns.inria.fr/l4lod/
http://schema.theodi.org/odrs/

E. Cabrio, A. Palmero Aprosio, and S. Villata

be defined with one of the digital Rights Expression Languages like ODRL12
or MPEG-21, a machine-readable language that allows to declare rights and
permissions using the terms as defined in the Rights Data Dictionary.13 These
vocabularies, ODRL in particular, have not been specifically conceived for the
Web of Data scenario, but they intend to provide flexible mechanisms to support
transparent and innovative use of digital content in publishing, distribution and
consumption of digital media across all sectors. So far only the CC REL [1], the
standard recommended by CC for the machine-readable expression of licensing
terms, has been used by the Linked Data community.

We choose ODRL and CC REL vocabularies for our purposes. The reasons
are the following: i) CC REL is the vocabulary to be used for all CC licenses, and
it is the mostly adopted vocabulary in the Linked Data community for licenses
specification; and ii) ODRL allows the specification of fine grained licensing
terms both for data (thus satisfying the Web of Data scenario), and for all other
digital media, allowing a broader application of NLL2RDF.

CC REL specifies for each cc:License a set of cc:Permissions (an action that may or may not be allowed), cc:Requirements (an action that may
or may not be requested to the user), and cc:Prohibitions (something the
user is asked not to do). The vocabulary specifies the following permissions
(cc:Reproduction, cc:Distribution, cc:DerivativeWork, cc:Sharing), requirements (cc:Notice, cc:Attribution, cc:ShareAlike, cc:SourceCode,
cc:Copyleft, cc:LesserCopyleft), and prohibitions (cc:CommercialUse, and
cc:HighIncomeNationUse). For more details on the CC REL vocabulary, see [1].
Let us consider a license, like CC Attribution-NonCommercial License14, where
permissions are Reproduction, Distribution and Derivative Works, requirements
are Notice and Attribution, and Commercial Use is prohibited. The license is
represented in RDF (Turtle syntax15) using the CC REL vocabulary as follows:16

:licCC-BY-NC a cc:License;

cc:legalcode <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/>;

cc:permits cc:Reproduction;
cc:permits cc:Distribution;
cc:permits cc:DerivativeWorks;
cc:requires cc:Notice;
cc:requires cc:Attribution;
cc:prohibits cc:CommercialUse.

ODRL specifies, instead, different kinds of Policies (i.e., Agreement, Offer,
Privacy, Request, Set and Ticket). In NLL2RDF we adopt Set, a policy expression that consists in entities from the complete model. Permissions, prohibitions
and duties (i.e., the requirements specified in CC REL) are specified in terms of

http://www.w3.org/community/odrl/
http://iso21000-6.net/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
http://www.w3.org/TeamSubmission/turtle/

16 Prefixes are omitted for clarity reasons.
?

?

?
an action. For instance, we may have the action of attributing an asset (any-
thing which can be subject to a policy), i.e., odrl: action odrl: attribute.
For more details about the ODRL vocabulary, refer to the ODRL Community
group.17 The following example shows a Set policy expression, stating that the
licensed asset is the target of the permission to reproduce, distribute, derive, the
duty to attribute and attach the policy and, the prohibition to commercialize.
It expresses the same rights as the CC license reported above.

:licCC-BY-NC a odrl:Set;

odrl:permission [

a odrl:Permission;
odrl:action odrl:reprodice;
odrl:action odrl:distribute;
odrl:action odrl:derive

] ;
odrl:prohibition [

a odrl:Prohibition;
odrl:action odrl:commercialize

] ;
odrl:duty [

a odrl:Duty;
odrl:action odrl:attribute;
odrl:action odrl:attachPolicy

] .

The NLL2RDF framework will adopt CC REL vocabulary to specify CC

licenses, and the ODRL vocabulary to specify all other licenses.

2.2 The NLL2RDF Framework

After choosing the vocabularies to be used to express licenses in RDF, we can
now describe our framework for RDF-based licenses specifications automatically
extracted from natural language texts. The architecture of NLL2RDF is visualized in Figure 1. NLL2RDF can be accessed both by humans through the web
interface18 and by automated tools through the API of the system.

NLL2RDF input is the natural language definition of the licensing terms to
be translated into RDF. NLL2RDF access such NL text T and applies some
preprocessing steps: tokenization, lemmatization, part-of-speech tagging. After
that, a classification step is performed, using kernel methods. We first embed
the input data in a suitable feature space, and then use a linear algorithm to discover nonlinear patterns in the input space. Typically, the mapping is performed
implicitly by a so-called kernel function.
Formally, the kernel is a function k : X  X  R that takes as input two data
objects (e.g., vectors, texts, parse trees) and outputs a real number characterizing

http://w3.org/ns/odrl/2/

18 A demo of NLL2RDF is available at www.airpedia.org/NLL2RDF

E. Cabrio, A. Palmero Aprosio, and S. Villata

PREPROCESSING

MODULE

CLASSIFICATION 

MODULE

TOKENIZATION

LEMMATIZATION

RDF LICENSES GENERATION

MODULE

NATURAL LANGUAGE

LICENSES TEXTS

PoS TAGGING

NLL2RDF

RDF LICENSES
SPECIFICATION

Fig. 1. The architecture of NLL2RDF

their similarity, with the property that the function is symmetric and positive

semi-definite. That is, for all x1, x2  X, it satisfies
k(x1, x2) = (x1), (x2),

where  is an explicit mapping from X to an (inner product) feature space F .
For our task, we work at sentence level, meaning that each sentence is considered
as a vector. We define and combine two different kernel functions that calculate
the pairwise similarity between sentences (bag-of-words and verb). Many classifiers can be used with kernels, we use Support Vector Machine. In particular, we
used libSVM 3.1219, a freely available tool.

The simplest method to calculate the similarity between two sentences is to
compute the inner product of their vector representation in the vector space
model (VSM). Formally, we define a space of dimensionality N in which each
dimension is associated with one feature, and the sentence s is represented by a
row vector

j (s) = (w(f1, s), w(f2, s), . . . , w(fN , s)),

where the function w(fk, s) records whether a particular feature fk is active in
the sentence s. Using this representation, we define the bag-of-features kernel
between sentences as

KF (s1, s2) = j(s1), j(s2),

(1)

(2)

Bag-of-words Kernel. The bag-of-words kernel (KW ) is defined as in Equation (2) where the function w(fk, s) in Equation (1) is the standard term
frequency (tf  idf) of the word fk in the
frequency-inverse document
sentence s.

http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm/
?

?

?
Verb Kernel. The verb kernel (KV ) is defined as in Equation (2) where the
fk in Equation (1) are elements of the set including the union of all the verb
tokens (part-of-speech tags starting with V) and the same tokens preceded by
the token not in the sentence. Each verb token t is associated to two different
features, depending on whether it is preceded by not. In particular, if s contains
that token, the corresponding feature is activated (that is w(fk, s) = 1).

Composite Kernel. Having defined the two basic kernels representing different
characteristics of entity descriptions, we finally define the composite kernel as

KCOMBO(s1, s2) = KW (s1, s2) + KV (s1, s2)

(3)

The individual kernels are normalized. This plays an important role in allowing
us to integrate information from heterogeneous feature spaces. It follows directly
from the explicit construction of the feature space and from closure properties
of kernels that the composite kernel is a valid kernel.

NLL2RDF returns to the querying agent the RDF description of the licensing
terms provided in natural language. Note that NLL2RDF does not provide any
triple about the licensed work/asset. This means that, in case the generated
RDF license has to be used to license a specific asset asset841, then a triple
concerning the connection between the license and the asset has to be added by
the agent (human or automated) who uses NLL2RDF.

3 Experimental Setting

To experiment our framework NLL2RDF, we selected a set of licenses (i.e. all
the licenses adopted to certify data in the Linked Data cloud, plus additional
software and online published material licenses) to create our reference dataset
(described in Section 3.1). We then run NLL2RDF to generate the machine readable version of these licenses. More details on the experiments, and a discussion
of the results we have obtained are reported in Section 3.2.

3.1 Dataset Creation

In order to evaluate NLL2RDF, as a first step we selected a set of licenses
to build our reference dataset. More specifically, our reference dataset is composed by 37 licenses, comprising all the licenses adopted to certify data in the
Linked Data cloud (as all the Creative Commons licenses20), software licenses
(as Mozilla Public License21 and Microsoft License22), and additional licenses
for other material on the Web (as the UK Open Government license, and the
New Free Documentation License23).

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
http://www.mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/
http://referencesource.microsoft.com/referencesourcelicensing.aspx
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html

E. Cabrio, A. Palmero Aprosio, and S. Villata

As a second step, we manually translated the textual version of each license
into RDF, adopting the vocabularies described in Section 2.1 (i.e. CC REL for
Creative Commons and ODRL for all the other licenses). Given for instance a
textual fragment of the ODC Open Database License (ODbL)24:

You are free: To Share: To copy, distribute and use the database. To Create:
To produce works from the database. To Adapt: To modify, transform and build
upon the database. As long as you: Attribute: You must attribute any public use
of the database, or works produced from the database, in the manner specified in
the ODbL. For any use or redistribution of the database, or works produced from
it, you must make clear to others the license of the database and keep intact any
notices on the original database. Share-Alike: If you publicly use any adapted
version of this database, or works produced from an adapted database, you must
also offer that adapted database under the ODbL. [...]

we manually built the machine readable version of the license as follows:

@prefix odrl:
@prefix : http://example/licenses.

http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/.

:licODBL a odrl:Set;

odrl:permission [

a odrl:Permission;
odrl:action odrl:derive;
odrl:action odrl:share

] ;
odrl:duty [

a odrl:Duty;
odrl:action odrl:attribute;
odrl:action odrl:shareAlike

] .

We use this machine readable version of the licenses as a goldstandard, i.e., to be
compared with NLL2RDFs output in order to evaluate its ability in generating
a correct RDF from the licenses texts.

As a third step in the creation of the reference dataset, we annotated in
the textual version of the license the sentences containing the lexicalization
of the ontological relations (i.e., the sentences whose meaning correspond to
the ontological relations), to train our system. For instance, in the example of
the ODbL license above, we annotated the sentence You are free: To Share the
database with the ODRL relation odrl:Permission and the value odrl:share;
the sentence You are free: To produce works from the database with the ODRL
relation odrl:Permission and the value odrl:derive; the sentence As long as
you: Attribute: You must attribute any public use of the database, or works produced from the database, in the manner specified in the ODbL with the ODRL
relation odrl:Duty and the value odrl:attribute; and the sentence As long

http://opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl/summary/
?

?

?
as you: Share-Alike: If you publicly use any adapted version of this database,
or works produced from an adapted database, you must also offer that adapted
database under the ODbL with the ODRL relation odrl:Duty and the value
odrl:shareAlike.

The same annotation task has been carried out on Creative Common licenses
adopting CC REL ontology. For instance, given a textual fragment of the Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license25:

You are free to: Share - copy and redistribute the material in any medium or
format. Adapt - remix, transform, and build upon the material for any purpose,
even commercially. The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you
follow the license terms. Under the following terms: Attribution - You must give
appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were
made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use. No additional restrictions You may
not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict others from
doing anything the license permits.

we manually built the machine readable version of the license as follows:26

@prefix cc: http://creativecommons.org/ns.
@prefix : http://example/licenses.

:licCC-BY a cc:License;

cc:legalcode <http://creativecommons.org/

licenses/by/4.0/legalcode>;

cc:requires cc:Notice;
cc:requires cc:Attribution;
cc:permits cc:Reproduction;
cc:permits cc:Distribution;
cc:permits cc:DerivativeWorks.

We then annotate in the textual version of the license the sentences whose
meaning correspond to the ontological relations: the sentence You are free
to: copy the material in any medium or format with the CC REL relation
cc:permits and the value cc:Reproduction; the sentence You are free to: redistribute the material in any medium or format with the CC REL relation
cc:permits and the value cc:Distribution; the sentence You are free to:
remix, transform, and build upon the material for any purpose with the CC REL
relation cc:permits and the value cc:DerivativeWorks; the sentence You must
provide a link to the license with the CC REL relation cc:requires and the
value cc:Notice; the sentence You must give appropriate credit with the CC
REL relation cc:requires and the value cc:Attribution.

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

26 CC licenses are also available in XML/RDF format on the CC website. CC-BY in

particular is available at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/rdf

E. Cabrio, A. Palmero Aprosio, and S. Villata

For the dataset annotation we adopted the CONLL IOB format27, usually
used in the NLP community for Natural Language Learning shared tasks. We
first tokenized the sentences using Stanford Parser [18], and we then added two
columns, the first one for the annotation of the relation, and the second one for
the value, as follows28:

DERIVE

#id-004
You

are
?

?

?
free

:
[...]
?

?

?
To
produce
works
from
the
database
.
?

?

?
:
?

?

?
B-PERMISSION
I-PERMISSION
I-PERMISSION

I-PERMISSION
I-PERMISSION
I-PERMISSION
I-PERMISSION
I-PERMISSION

.

I-PERMISSION

The dataset has been annotated and independently verified by two annotators,
with a complete agreement on the annotations (as introduced before, at this stage
NLL2RDF considers licenses basic deontic components only, for which human
agreement is complete on almost all of them).

3.2 Evaluation

In our experiments, we use a linear SVM classifier for each possible relationvalue present in all the licenses. In addition, we mapped the CC REL vocabulary
labels on the ODRL labels, to increase the number of examples to train and test
NLL2RDF (we apply then the mapping in the reverse order to generate the
correct RDF for CC REL licenses). Only the couples relation-values with more
than 5 occurrences in the data are reported.29 Table 1 describes the NLL2RDF
performances in the relation assignment over the licenses included in our dataset.

27 In this scheme, each token is tagged with one of three special chunk tags, I (inside),
O (outside), or B (begin). A token is tagged as B if it marks the beginning of a
chunk. Subsequent tokens within the chunk are tagged I. All other tokens are tagged
O. The B and I tags are suffixed with the chunk type according to our annotation
task, e.g. B-PERMISSION, I-PERMISSION. Of course, it is not necessary to specify
a chunk type for tokens that appear outside a chunk, so these are just labeled O.

28 The annotated dataset is available at www.airpedia.org/NLL2RDF/

dataset-licenses. Each couple relation-value has been annotated in a separate file,
contained in a folder with the license name.

29 The following couples

in the
data are: Permission:read (1 occurrence), Permission:commercialize (3),
Permission:share (4), Duty:attachSource (1), Prohibition:distribute (3), and
Prohibition:modify (1).

relation-values with less

than 5 occurrences
?

?

?
Given a sentence, we test it against every classifiers, so that we can intercept
those sentences containing more than one relation (see Section 3.1 for an exam-
ple). Performances are calculated using the n-fold cross-validation (n = 3). The
annotated data set is randomly split into 3 parts containing the same number
of examples (1/3 of the total, around 560 sentences). A single subset is retained
as test set, while the remaining 2 subsets are used as training data. The process
is executed 3 times, each time with a different subset used for validation, giving
3 different pairs of precision/recall values. These values are then averaged to
obtain the final results.

Table 1. Performances of NLL2RDF on the correct assignment of each triple

relation-value
Permission:distribute
Permission:derive
Permission:reproduce
Permission:modify
Permission:copy
Permission:sell

Duty:shareAlike
Duty:attachPolicy
Duty:attribute

Prohibition:commercialize

# occurr. precision recall f-measure
?

?

?
0.74
0.66
0.55
0.66
0.77
0.83
0.72
0.76
?

?

?
0.59
0.51
0.51
0.2
0.22
0.38
0.3
0.63
0.66
0.33

0.65
0.56
0.46
0.3
0.34
0.53
0.36
0.68
0.78
0.49

NLL2RDF reaches quite interesting results for some relation-value assign-
ment, mainly for the ones with a high number of occurrences in the training data
(e.g. Permission:distribute, Duty:attachPolicy, Duty:attribute). For
some other relations, SVM performances are far from being optimal, due to
i) the sparsity of some relations in the data (i.e. for some couples relation-value
only few examples are present in the data, e.g. Prohibition:commercialize),
ii) the fact that the lexicalizations of relations such as Permission:modify involve a lot of language variability, each one not supported by a sufficient number of occurrences in the text (e.g. you are free to modify; assure everyone
the effective freedom [...] with modification), and iii) very similar surface forms
can refer to different relations-values (for instance for Duty:shareAlike and
Duty:attachPolicy, we have the textual representations Redistributions must
reproduce the above copyright notice for the former, and Redistributions must retain the copyright notice for the latter). We are aware that the current version of
NLL2RDF is not yet fully reliable, but at the present stage our system is not yet
intended to completely substitute users: it is intended as a tool to support them
in specifying the machine readable version of licensing information. As a short
improvement, we are planning to collect and annotate other licenses, to increase
our training dataset in size and variability. Moreover, since certain structures in
licenses appear over and over, we are envisaging to add manually written rules
to capture recurrent patterns. In general, more efforts would also be required

E. Cabrio, A. Palmero Aprosio, and S. Villata

from the community, to encourage data providers to publish machine readable
licenses, semi-automatically and with the support of the NLL2RDF system.

4 Related Work

Heath and Bizer [11] underline that the absence of clarity for data consumers
about the terms under which they can reuse a particular dataset, and the absence
of common guidelines for data licensing, are likely to hinder use and reuse of
data. Therefore, all Linked Data on the Web should include explicit licenses, or
waiver statements, as discussed by [13], who propose the Open Data Commons
licenses that try to fully license any rights that cover databases and data.

Beside the vocabularies mentioned in Section 2.1, other few vocabularies have
been proposed in the literature to model, to different extent, licensing infor-
mation. The Waiver vocabulary30, for instance, defines properties to use when
describing waivers of rights over data and content, where a waiver is defined as a
voluntary relinquishment or surrender of some known right or privilege. As underlined by [9,17], licenses are usually connected to the data through the VoID
description. In particular, the Dublin Core vocabulary31 is usually adopted to
associate licenses to resources through the property dc:license, and the class
dc:LicenseDocument provides the legal document giving official permission to
do something with the resource. Two further vocabularies which may be adopted
to define the licensing terms associated to the data on the Web are the Description of a Project vocabulary (DOAP)32, and the Ontology Metadata vocabulary
(OMV)33. More precisely, DOAP specifies a property doap:license referring
to the URI of an RDF description of the license the software is distributed un-
der; OMV defines the property omv:hasLicense, which provides the underlying
license model, and a class omv:LicenseModel, which describes the usage conditions of an ontology. The attachment of additional information like rights or
licenses to RDF triplets may be done also by adopting named graphs [3]. Carroll
et al. [3] introduce them to allow publishers to communicate assertional intent
and to sign their assertions. Moreover, the W3C Provenance WG [10] defines the
kind of information to be used to form assessments about data quality, reliability
or trustworthiness.

The different licenses, e.g., Creative Commons, Open Data Commons, have
common features, but also differ from each others. The requirement to mention
the author (attribution) seems to be one of the best shared features. Most legal
frameworks allow commercial use: that is, they make it possible for re-users to sell
public data without transforming or enriching them. The Web NDL Authority
license34 is an exception, and prohibits reuse as is of its data for commercial

http://vocab.org/waive/terms/
http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms/
http://usefulinc.com/ns/doap
http://omv2.sourceforge.net/index.html
http://iss.ndl.go.jp/ndla/use/
?

?

?
purposes: a further individual examination by the licensor is necessary. For a
further discussion about rights declaration in Linked Data, see [17].

In the Web scenario, a number of works address the problem of representing and/or reasoning over licensing information. Iannella 35 presents the Open
Digital Rights Language (ODRL) for expressing rights information over con-
tent, and Gangadharan et al. [5] further extend ODRL developing the ODRL-S
language to implement the clauses of service licensing. Gangadharan et al. [6]
address the issue of service license composition and compatibility analysis basing on ODRL-S. They specify a matchmaking algorithm which verifies whether
two service licenses are compatible. If so, the services can be composed and the
framework determines the license of the composite service. Truong et al. [19]
address the issue of analyzing data contracts, based again on ODRL-S. Contract analysis leads to the definition of a contract composition where first the
comparable contractual terms from the different data contracts are retrieved,
and second an evaluation of the new contractual terms for the data mash-up is
addressed. Krotzsch and Speiser [12] present a semantic framework for evaluating ShareAlike recursive statements. In particular, they develop a general policy
modelling language, then instantiated with OWL DL and Datalog, for supporting
self-referential policies as expressed by CC. Finally, Gordon [8] presents a legal
prototype for analyzing open source licenses compatibility using the Carneades
argumentation system. All these works assume licensing information to be expressed in some kind of machine readable format or formal syntax. Given that
licenses are always expressed first in natural language, these frameworks could
rely on NLL2RDF to have a first machine readable version of the license in RDF.
Then, the translation from RDF to the specific formal syntax they need to
reason over licensing terms has to be performed. However, this step is usually
less demanding than a direct translation form NL to a specific syntax, given the
high complexity and variability of natural language texts.

Closer to the general purpose of our work of supporting users in defining
machine readable descriptions of licenses, Nadah et al. [14] propose to assist
licensors work by providing a generic way to instantiate licenses, independent
from specific formats. Then they translate such license into more specific terms
compliant with the specific standards used by distribution systems, i.e., ODRL
and MPEG Rights Data Dictionaries. They do not address the problem of providing an automated tool to move from NL licenses to their RDF representation,
but they propose a model to move from a license description through a particular
ontology to the description of the same license using another ontology.

Rodriguez-Doncel et al. [16,15] discuss licenses patterns for Linked Data. They
first analyze and discuss six rights expression languages, abstracting their commonalities and outlining their underlying pattern. Second, they propose the
License Linked Data Resources pattern which provides a solution to describe
existing licenses and rights expressions both for open and not open scenarios.
Even if our final goal is different from theirs, the LLDR pattern is useful for an
overall structured representation of the different rights expression languages.

http://odrl.net/1.1/ODRL-11.pdf

E. Cabrio, A. Palmero Aprosio, and S. Villata

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we presented NLL2RDF, an automated framework to support
RDF-based licenses specifications starting from natural language texts. The goal
of NLL2RDF is to provide both human users, and automated systems with a support to generate machine readable representations of licensing terms. We adopt
the CC REL and the ODRL vocabularies to specify the licenses in RDF. Our
framework relies on NLP techniques to generate in an automated way such RDF
based licenses descriptions. In particular, the framework exploits SVM to classify
the couples relation-value present in the licenses, and then the RDF version of
the license is generated filling a pre-defined RDF template. In order to train the
system, two annotators independently marked up a set of 37 licenses, selected
among the set of widely adopted licenses in the Web of Data in particular, and
in the Web in general. The experimental evaluation shows the feasibility of the
proposed framework and fosters to pursue with this research direction. Both the
dataset and the system, as web service, are available online.

NLL2RDF provides a first step towards the automatic analysis of natural
language licenses texts to return their machine readable description. However,
several open challenges still remain to be addressed. For instance, user evaluation is the first step of future works, even if we have already started to gather
feedback about the systems results from legal experts in the Web area. Second,
we will extend the dataset to train our system by adding other licenses in order
to improve the performances of our system, particularly with respect to those
deontic components which do not appear frequently nowadays in the dataset.
We are planning to collect and annotate other licenses, to increase our training
dataset (so that to capture enough language variability to improve the system
robustness). Third, we will improve the precision of RDF licenses description. As
we previously motivated, at the present time we model licenses using only the
basic deontic components they express without taking into account any further
constraint or exception stated in the NL license text. Moreover, we plan to couple machine learning algorithms with pattern-based approaches for information
extraction (following [7]). Finally, the system can be extended to a multilingual
scenario (as far as a NLP tool to process the language at issue is available), to
provide machine readable versions of licenses published by national institutions,
or licenses published in different languages.

Acknowledgements. The work of Elena Cabrio was funded by the French
Government (National Research Agency, ANR) through the Investments for
the Future Program reference # ANR-11-LABX-0031-01.
